WhisperAI Transcription Report

Title: 17-osteoporosis
Date: 11/19/2025
Duration: 3329 seconds
Language: auto

---

TRANSCRIPTION:

Foreign. Hi and welcome to the AAFP MSK and Sports Conference. This lecture is the Osteoporosis Update. And we all know that bone health is important throughout our lifetime to build our bones up when we're younger and then in the senior years.

We want to encourage our patients to continue exercising to keep good bone health and of course, to prevent fractures.

So I don't have anything to disclose. We're going to speak about reviewing patients for osteoporosis, how to manage that drug holiday for patients who have been on a bisphosphonate for five years and overall discuss the sequencing of medications throughout the senior years. This slide shows some great resources that really are helpful, especially at the Bone Health and Osteoporosis foundation website.

And, and that is basically the name of the website, bonehealth and osteoporosis.org it is the updated name of the National Osteoporosis Foundation. And there you'll find under the professional resources, links to Bone Source. And Bone Source has wonderful information under a tool called the Radically Simple Tool. The Radically Simple Tool includes a link to FRAX in the listing there you'll also see the letter that we can send to dentists, which is very helpful.

There is an osteoporosis order set on that website that is very helpful.

So I hope you check out bonehealth and osteoporosis.com so also listed here, there is a Bone Health Mentoring telementoring conference every week at the University of New Mexico, which is awesome. If you have any cases or questions that you want to present, you can do that virtually as well as listen in to experts around the country, discuss different topics on osteoporosis. And at the bottom, Mayo Clinic also has a point of care tool for osteoporosis treatment decisions.

So we know that osteoporosis is a disease marked by decreased bone strength that leads to fractures. And we want to look at any patient who has a fracture over the age of 50 to investigate the possibility that they may have osteoporosis. Meaning we want to get a DEXA scan on anyone over the age of 50.

We know that bone strength is not only the bone density that we can see on the DEXA scan, but it's only the micro.

It's also the microarchitecture that is much harder to tell with imaging. We could see that on quantitative ct, but our Frank's questions actually help with that bone quality part of it, the bone microarchitectures, because genetics do count tobacco steroids Decrease the strength of the microarchitecture as well.

So we know that not all fractures are necessarily osteoporotic.

So how do we differentiate that?

I say that any fall, basically, that wouldn't have happened. Any fracture that wouldn't have happened when we're younger, any fracture that happens from a fall from standing height or less, if somebody steps off the curve and fractures their ankle, or if the dog trips them up and they fracture their wrist or playing pickleball and they fracture their elbow, any of these fractures are considered a fragility fracture and osteoporosis osteoporotic fracture, because the patient's not standing up on a ladder, somebody's on ladder and falls, then that would be different. That might not be osteoporosis, but we still might want to get a DEXA scan.

We know that osteoporosis is unfortunately too common.

And the fractures occur very often. Over the age of 51, half of the women and a quarter of the men will suffer from a fracture. And each year in our country, there are 300,000 hip fractures. And after that, a quarter of the people will die, a quarter end up in nursing homes, and significantly, a half will end up with a walking aid with decreased independence.

Osteoporosis is very expensive. The price tag of $57 billion annually. And we know that after our patients are fracturing, we're not thinking about osteoporosis. We're not doing a very good job all the time.

We're not meeting that care gap. There's an 80% care gap after our patient's fracture. We should get a DEXA and investigate for osteoporosis better than we're doing.

So it's not only hip fractures are important.

Vertebral fractures are very important. Only a third are actually clinically diagnosed. Probably seen vert fractures on a chest X ray that the patient didn't know they had just had a sore back. In a few months, it got better.

But vertebral fractures do define osteoporosis as well as one vertebral fracture really increases the risk of adjacent or more vertebral fractures fivefold, as well as doubles the risk of a future hip fracture. In patients who have multiple hip vertebral fractures, they can have that kyphotic posture where we say fracture, but gets fractured. And the thoracic cavities, well as the abdominal cavities can decrease in size. We have decreased pulmonary functions, and as well as GI problems with constipation.

The kyphotic posture also leads to an increased risk of falling. Falling tends to make patients stay at home more. Their world gets smaller, increases the risk of depression.

So risk fractures.

We don't want to miss risk fractures. And getting DEXA scan on these people, they're usually younger women in their 50s and 60s and can be an early warning sign to get a dexa. These wrist fractures are the most common fracture of the upper extremity. They help us have insight into this fact that these patients may have osteoporosis in the future.

So we want to catch those.

We know that strong bones begin in childhood. Even in utero, we see the osteoblastic, osteoclastic activity going on. Remember, our osteoblastic cells build bone and our osteoclastic cells are clearing away the old bones.

It's a constant kind of a remodeling process. Up to the age of 30, we're primarily building new bone with the osteoblastic cells. That's why we reach that peak bone density around the age of 30. And then at the age of 50, when women go through menopause and lose a lot of the estrogen, the osteoclastic activity really increases like fivefold.

And that's why osteoporosis really pronounces itself as accelerated at the time of menopause. After those first five perimenopausal years does tend to slow down a little bit, down to about 1% loss per year, which is the same for men over the age of 70.

So because we can't always prevent osteoporosis, we do want to screen for it.

So the USPSTF has some screening guidelines for us.

We want to screen every woman who's 65 years of age and, and older, as well as younger women who have the same risk of a 65 year old woman without any risk factors. In the United States, the USPSTF has not found ample evidence to support screening for osteoporosis in men.

So getting that DEXA scan paid for in men can be a little bit tricky. If men have had a fracture, you can use that.

I often will put men into the FRAC score and see if they come up as high risk if their major is greater than 8.4. And then get the DEXA scan and if it comes back, of course it's osteopenic or osteoporotic, then the bill is paid for. But for women 65 and older, we use the diagnosis of postmenopausal. And for men, you know, I pretty much have to have a suspicion that they may have osteoporosis and they may be thinner, have copd and then I will use those diagnoses and increase risk to try to have their DEXA stands paid for.

We also want to be sure to screen for patients who are on steroids over the age of 40 if they've been on an equivalent of 5mg a day for three months.

So this slide helps us understand how do we know what the average risk of a 65 year old Caucasian female in the United States without any risk factors is.

So if you put that model patient into frax, you see here, the average weight in the United States is actually a BMI of 28.8.

So we plug in that weight without any risk.

This is a picture of the frax. The FRAX does ask age, weight, height, previous fracture, did your parent have a hip fracture? Only the hip fracture. And actually we found statistically that's only important for patients who parents were under the age of 90 when that happened.

But I do still enter hip fracture data for patients whose parents were over 90 and had a hip fracture. But I'll compare it with them with and without that older parental hip fracture. If the patient's currently smoking on steroids, they have osteoporosis. If they have rheumatoid arthritis or secondary osteoporosis, now that's going to include early menopause, hyperparathyroidism, hyperthyroidism, any GI malabsorptive disorders, alcohol, drinking, three or more units a day of alcohol.

And then if we're just using the DEXA scan for screening, we're not going to have a BMD to put in.

So we didn't put a BMD in this example. And we see that the major risk of having a major osteoporotic fracture for this benchmark patient that we're using over the next 10 years is 8.4 and a hip fracture risk is 1%.

So that's what we want to compare other patients to.

We can plug them in and see if their major risk is greater than 8.4. Then we want to get a DEXA scan or hip greater than one.

So these are other tools that were mentioned in the USPSTF guideline for screening and treating osteoporosis. Especially in the screening, the first tool is the easiest and I find it's quite generous in who to get the DEXA scan in.

It's the osteoporosis self assessment tool where we simply take the patient's weight in kilogram and sub track their age in years. And if it's less than 10, that's been determined to get high enough risk to order a DEXA scan. And then these are more of those tools, each adding on another question, such as prior fracture, rheumatoid arthritis, estrogen use.

So once we get a DEXA scan in someone, the question is, well, when do we get another.

We get that baseline DEXA scan in a 65 year old woman and if it's completely normal, one study showed that we may not need to get another DEXA scan for another 10 years years if that woman does not develop any risk factors in that interval period.

So what we really want to look at is we get the first DEXA and then we want to look at that T score. If that T score is in the osteopenic range, you know you're going to want to repeat it, you know, probably sooner than five years, probably at two years, if they're osteoporotic, certainly in two years. But we can use both the T score and the FRAX score to help determine when to get that follow up DEXA.

Most DEXAs we get in two years.

Sometimes I'll order a DEXA scan in one year, really at a type 3 treatment threshold when it's really going to matter to a patient. But supposedly the interval to see least significant change is really 18 months.

So I feel like two years is pretty much the best minimal period in between.

And Medicare and Insurance doesn't bulk at that. But in your patients who have a normal DEXA scan, you can wait five years, sometimes even more.

So we've expanded the diagnosis of osteoporosis.

Now we diagnose osteoporosis if a patient has a low trauma spine fracture or hip fracture.

If somebody falls and has a hip fracture, they have osteoporosis no matter what their DEXA scan says.

If someone coughs and has a vertebral fracture or for some reason has a low trauma vertebral fracture, they have osteoporosis no matter what that DEXA scan shows.

We also have expanded the diagnosis of osteoporosis to include patients who are osteopenic with those T scores between the -1 and -2.5 who have had a fragility fracture of the proximal humerus, distal forearm or pelvis. And then as before historically, we still of course include patients with a T score of minus 2.5 or below.

There's another software package on the DEXA scan that looks for vertebral fractures, because we missed so many vert fractures, and they are by definition the diagnosis. They define a patient as having osteoporosis.

So you might want to consider ordering a vertebral fracture assessment. It's called a vfa.

If your hospital DEXA scan does include that, I use this, especially if a patient is osteopenic and might not enter into that treatment category. But if we find that they have a fracture, they would.

So these are the reasons to order it pretty much if it's going to make a difference in your care. And I find sometimes that difference in care is helping the patient to understand that they are at risk.

Because sometimes patients really can't imagine that they would have a fracture. And when they do see that Burt fracture, it helps them buy into the fact that they need to make a change and possibly help them agree to take an osteoporosis medication. Another tool on the DEXA scan is the FRAX score, the tbs, the FRAX adjusted with the trabecular bone score.

So let me see if I can explain this.

So basically, when the patient gets the DEXA scan down in the right hand corner, and you do have to order this in addition to your regular dexa, if you put DEXA plus tbs, the radiologist will account for that TBS factor into the risk of the patient's DEXA scan. This is not very commonly used. I think they're still billing questions out with this. But what the TBS does.

This is a textural index. It actually looks at the quality of the bone, and it is not used to diagnose osteoporosis on its own. It's just extra information that we can use with the T CEL score to help decide the patient's risk.

So it's called a trabecular bone score.

It does need to be ordered separately when you order the DEXA scan. It has been covered by Medicare for a couple years now, but I know our institution is still figuring out how to bill for that. I don't use it very often, but just want you to be familiar with it. It does give us a little insight into microarchitecture.

So finding these osteopenic patients are really important, and that's because most fractures actually happen in the osteopenic threat patients. As you'll see with the black bar here, the number of women with fractures are actually in that T score range of -1 to -2 or down to -2.5. Of course, we know as the bone density decreases, the fracture rate certainly Continues to go up.

So the gray columns represent over to the right a T score of -3.5.

But finding those osteopenic patients by using the FRAX is very important. The FRAX allows us to plug patients with osteopenic T scores in to see if they have other risks, risk factors that would lead them to the threshold of treatment recommendation.

So who we treat for osteoporosis with medications, the treatment threshold is actually pretty much the same as the diagnosis of osteoporosis. We see here that we do want to treat patients for primary fracture prevention who have had a fracture of, I mean primary prevention who have not had a fracture but have a T score of -2.5 or less of the lumbar spine, hip or femoral neck.

And if those are not available, consider it of the 1/3 radius. Though we certainly do find lower T scores traditionally in the radius as well as a T score in that osteopenic range with an elevated frac.

So a major risk of fracturing of greater than 20% or a 10 year probability of a hip fracture of greater than 3%.

We also want to help prevent those secondary fractures.

Anybody who has fallen and had a fracture at the hip or the spine, sometimes just coughing, right, I'll get a spinal fracture. As well as patients in the osteopenic T score range who have had a fragility fracture of the proximal humerus, distal forearm or the pelvis.

So this osteopenic fracture, that's a broader catch hold than what we had before.

So we want to consider secondary causes of osteoporosis.

This includes lifestyle factors such as alcohol, inadequate physical activity, smoking, low calcium intake, genetic disorders, this includes a parental hip fracture, hypogonadal states, especially the female athlete triad, hypogonadism, anorexia, premature menopause, endocrine disorders, including diabetes.

So we know that being underweight is certainly a risk for osteoporosis, but diabetes and over obesity is as well. Hyperparathyroidism, thyrotoxicosis, GI disorders, anything that decreases the absorption of nutrients of calcium or vitamin D is going to lead to decreased bone metabolism, decreased quality bone structure.

So any GI malabsorption disorders, hematologic disorders, we don't want to miss a multiple myeloma, leukemia or lymphomas, rheumatologic and autoimmune disease, rheumatoid arthritis, in addition, of course, to the medication.

But rheumatoid arthritis itself does increase the risk of osteoporosis as well as neurologic and musculoskeletal injuries such as muscular dystrophy, spinal cord injuries, spinal cord patients, in the first six months to a year of their life, they can lose up to 25 to 40% of the bone density from the lack of neurologic innervation and the lack of weight bearing activity. And then miscellaneous conditions. I like to point out depression here because SSRIs have been noted to possibly be a risk factor for osteoporosis, but certainly depression is as well.

So we need to explain to our patients the importance of treating conditions that they have.

COPD is a risk as well as of course, the steroids that people need to take steroids or COPD at times. Oh, and then here are the medications. I think the one we think of the most is the steroids. Glucocorticoids, more than 5 milligrams a day for three months, as well as the PPIs.

There's concern about PPIs with bone quality as well as PPIs decrease the absorption of nutrients, including calcium carbonate in the stomach.

So patients who are on PPIs, we want to instruct them to take calcium citrate. And here we see the SSRI that concerns some patients, but we just need to explain that depression too is a risk factor for osteoporosis, maybe because the patients aren't getting out and getting as much exercise and activity.

So labs that we want to consider when we see patients with osteopenia or osteoporosis include a chem panel with the calcium, creatinine, phosphorus, liver function test, cbc, TSH and parathyroid, intact parathyroid, vitamin D.

In younger men with osteoporosis, we do want to look at the testosterone level, but not in older men. And for patients who in your mind, you're really not sure, it seems like the osteoporosis is out of proportion to their age and their overall other risk factors. Then I will get a 24 hour urine. And the reason we do this, our patients think when they see that calcium, serum calcium normal, that they're getting enough calcium, Whereas in reality we know that that serum calcium is going to be normal because our bodies are going to cool the calcium from the bone into the blood because of our functioning parathyroid hormone.

So the serum calcium, I explained the patient is more a marker that your parathyroid is working. And to know if you're consuming enough calcium and absorbing enough calcium in your diet, we really need to check that urinary calcium for 24 hours. Patients it's pretty intense. They have to keep the urine cold, even cooler in their bedroom or in the refrigerator.

But I do think it's a worthwhile test. And if patients are excreting too much calcium, then hydrochlorothiazide can help with that hypercalcemia. If they're not eating enough calcium, of course, we want to look at their dietary intake, consider how much supplement they need to meet the threshold. Then on the right other labs you might want to consider, in certain cases, the serum protein electrophoresis.

Celiac disease is a good thing to keep in the front of our minds.

So we want to advise what we call the universal bone health recommendations for everybody. That includes a diet that's rich in calcium. We do want to meet those recommended daily allowance of calcium every day for women over the age of 50 and men over the age of 70, that's 1,200 milligrams.

And I think that's one of the most important things we can do is explain to the patients it's best to get that 1200mg in your diet and then if you're not able to, to supplement to meet that 1200 milligram. But both calcium and vitamin D are threshold nutrients where more is not necessarily better.

So they don't want to super supplement the calcium that can cause kidney stones. Vitamin D, we want the level to be between 30 to 50.

And generally we can maintain that with a daily vitamin D of 800ius up to 1000. Of course, you know, smoking is bad for the bones. Exercise is great for the bones. And we always want to talk to our patients about fall prevention in the home because that's where the fractures really happen.

So this is the Institute of Medicine's recommendation for calcium and vitamin D. It hasn't changed since 2011. And I just pretty much remember 1200mg because most of my patients with osteoporosis really without. These are the same recommendations.

I tell patients, whether they have incredibly healthy bones or terrible osteoporosis, that calcium and vitamin D intake stays the same for patients who are below the threshold of vitamin D if they're vitamin D insufficient or deficient. I think right now the recommendation to bring that up is 5,000 units a day is the safest way to do that. In the past, we would use the 50,000 units once a week for eight weeks.

Now I think 5,000 a day for a month if their scores are 20 to 30, maybe for two months if their scores are below 20 if the vitamin D level was below 20.

So but I say in general 5,000 units a day for one to two months. And we know that those higher doses of vitamin D, of vitamin D actually in the sturdy study increase the risk of falling. And we found that actually patients with a lower intake of vitamin D200 1000 they had fewer falls than those with the higher vitamin D intake.

So again, we just want to meet that threshold.

More is not better. There is a program out of Canada, a very comprehensive exercise program for bone health called Too Fit to Fracture. The first recommendations look like what we tell pretty much all of our patients with strength training twice a week, balance challenges daily and physical activity for 20 to 30 minutes a day. But with osteoporosis we want to add in spine safe posture.

What I mean by that when we were talking about those vertebral fractures of the spine and how when people have a kyphotic posture increases the risk of those Burt fractures and fracture begets fractures.

So spine safe posture is pretty much about strengthening those spinal extension muscles and decreasing the forward flexion exercises. The Bhof Bone Health Osteoporosis foundation website has great exercises. On the website you can share with patients.

I like this slide a lot. A lot of patients are interested in Pilates and yoga and and on the left you'll see recommended positions, see how straight the spine is and then on the right we want to advise our patients to avoid the rounding poses, deep twist and deep stretches.

So there are a couple of great studies more and more studies about the importance of exercise on bone health. This study compared aerobic resistance and combined exercise as well as whole body vibration or mind body exercises on the BMD at the lumbar, femoral neck and total hip groups with and without exercise.

And they found mind body exercise was the best for improving lumbar and femoral neck BMD like Tai Chi that something has squat posture, stability, low movements including the arms and that resistance training was the best for improving total hip bmd. And these are the data to support that from this study. Fortunately, Medicare covers physical therapy for patients with both osteoporosis and osteopenia. And patients really seem to appreciate this.

I think it is best if the physical therapist is familiar with osteoporosis, maybe has had some additional training in osteoporosis. There is through the Bhof there is a certification process for this for we could take it as physicians, but it's more for personal trainers, physical therapists, it's called bone fit and information for that is on the Bone Health and osteoporosis website. And it is best if the therapists have knowledge of what we want to really encourage patients to do with their posture and how much impact they need at that point in their bone strength to optimize it.

We know also that after patients have had vert fracture, that physical therapy really reduces the risk of subsequent vertebral fractures by over 20%.

So let's talk about medications. When we talk about medications, remember those two groups of cells, the osteoblast and the osteoclast? Well, the medications really work on those cells. They're described by their primary function.

So we have the antiresorptive medications, which really work on the osteoclastic activity. They slow down the taking away of the old bone and then the anabolic med. These are all injections, but they do help primarily through the osteoblastic activity increasing. That's their primary action.

So In January of 2023, we did have an update to the 2017 ACP Osteoporosis Guideline. It is now a living guideline. This guideline the AAFP did adopt, it recommends bisphosphonase as the initial therapy for postmenopausal women and for men with primary osteoporosis. What was especially new in this guideline is it does suggest a sclerosin inhibitor, romosomide for one year, or the recombinant parathyroid hormone teriparatide for two years as first line for women at very high risk of fracture, followed by a bisphosphonate.

So these would be women probably who have a T score less than three have a fracture. You certainly want to try to fight with the insurance company, encourage the patient, encourage the insurance companies to cover these and start with more of an anabolic medication, the very beginning for those very, very high risk patients. The guidelines has demoted denosamide to a second line therapy for men and women with and to be used really, if our patients have contraindications to bisphosphonates. And I think this has to do with the concern of discontinuation fractures of prolia and managing that.

So denosamide is now a second line. And then again, we want to have an individualized approach for those with osteopenia. The guideline is now living. We hope soon to have updates with estrogen treatment duration, drug discontinuation, especially with those rebound fractures from denosamide, as well as more about the cereal bone density monitoring.

So all of that, hopefully the data is going to Be catching up with us. Recommendations from 2017 that are still there is that we want to treat for five years. This number for bisphosphonates, I think, was pulled from an old Mr. Fit study where we used the bisphosphonate for five years.

We know that bisphosphonates primarily build bone for about three years and then the next two years is, I think, of it just increasing in the bone, more kind of building up.

Where we could then take that holiday, possibly after five years, but only for bisphosphonates. They recommended the guideline, recommended against getting a DEXA scan during that time period. And that's because we know that even if the bone density is not increasing, that the fracture rate is decreasing, the fracture risk is decreasing no matter what.

So why get a DEXA scan?

Well, I do still get a DEXA scan every two years, and that's because it helps me make sure I'm not missing any reversible secondary causes. I think it's reassuring to my patients to see that their bone density is at least staying the same. And then the recommendation against using menopausal estrogen therapy or menopausal estrogen plus progesterone or reloxing for the treatment of osteoporosis in women, we can use these for climacteric state. Certainly women who have an increased risk of breast cancer might be on Raloxifen would be appropriate, but only for the breast cancer risk.

So these next two charts show the fracture data for the medications in postmenopausal women. This first chart shows for the antiresorptive bisphosphonates. You see that all the bisphosphonates decrease the risk of the hip, spine and non vert fractures, except for Evandronate or Vineva.

So I don't prescribe Vimeva or Evandronate.

I just haven't had the need to generally start with Fosamax, which is Alendronate. Residuinate is also a great oral medication. And with the same fracture data that Alendronate has, it just sometimes is more expensive, even though they're both generic. And then zoledronic acid or reclasses are IV visphosphonate for patients who can't tolerate the oral bisphosphonate regimen or if they have GI contraindications to the orals.

So continuing with the enterozorptus, we see Prolia is excellent at preventing spine, hip and non vert fractures as well as estrogen, but it's not recommended because of the Possible risk of cardiovascular the dvt. And then down at the bottom we see calcitonin does decrease the risk of spine fracture. We don't use calcitonin too much past three months, generally under a year because of association with malignancy. I have used it for longer periods of time though in elders with spine pain and osteoporosis of the spine who didn't want to use the other medications and at that point if they're in their mid-90s, weren't worried about starting a new malignancy.

And then our anabolics here we see that forteo or teriparatide does have data decreasing the risk of fracture of the spine, hip and non vert fractures. Tymlos though or a valiparatide did not have the hip fracture data. The newest medication, romozosomide that's that anisclerostin antibody avenity that does have the data for spine and nonvert but the hip fractures only after alendronate is taken after the year of affinity.

So bisphosphonates are really our go to medication.

We know they decrease spinal fractures by 50%, hip fractures by 40%. In the short term the benefits far exceed the risk in the long term though there are these rare side effects of atypical femoral fractures.

There's also the risk of ONJ of the jaw that our patients are concerned about and we're going to speak about that. The dosing regimen is specific.

It's once a week, first thing in the morning with 8 ounces of water. Don't take anything else to eat or sit or lie down. They need to remain upright. Sitting is fine for a half an hour after they take it.

We always want to get these baseline labs and the GFR. If it's less than 30 I would consider referring the patient to someone with experience in metabolic bone disease. Asking the nephrologist even. Yeah, even prolia in patients with creatinine planners is less than 30 can be tricky because of the hypocalcemia.

So IV zoledronic acid or reclass is what we want to use if our patients have those GI contraindications to the oral bisphosphonates, if they can't swallow, if they have a history of bariatric surgery or if they're not able to remember how to take the oral medications. The main problem with zoledronic acid is this flu like infusion symptom that patients syndrome that patients can have. This can last for generally about two to three days though. I did have one patient have arthralgias, migratory arthralgias for a few months.

The good news is that there is a 32% risk of this happening with the first infusion. But it goes down to 7% after the second dose and down to 3% after the.

So it goes from 32% with the first, 7% with the second dose and 3% with the third dose dose.

So we do want to recommend patients be well hydrated and take Tylenol before they have their zoledronic infusion.

So let's talk about these rare but significant risk of atypical femoral fractures and osteonecrosis of the jaw. Atypical femoral fractures are associated with longer term use more than five years of the medications, but it's very rare, less than 0.1%.

An absolute risk of only 5 cases per 10,000 patient treated ears. But we do want to evaluate and always ask our patients annually whether they have any hip, groin or thigh pain.

And if so, we want to get bilateral femur X rays to look for any sort of beaking as a early sign of an atypical femoral fracture. Changes that could lead to that O and J of the jaw same. Very rare one in 10,000. But we do want to recommend our patients have a dental exam prior to starting.

I recommend if there's any dental work to be done to please have it done before they start on their medication and then to continue good oral hygiene going to their dentist every six months while they're on treatment. This slide just shows the point of care decision aid tool from Mayo which I find is real helpful. It does show that 50% decrease in the relative risk of fracture as well as it does talk about those in purple there the concerns of osteonecrosis control. Fewer than 1 in 10,000 and patients trust Mayo.

I think when I bring this out as a decision tool, they like seeing that kind of picture. That helps a lot. The bone source. The Bone Health and Osteoporosis foundation has just great resources.

We talked about this in the beginning. This is what the website looks like. And there I've clicked on the professional link and if you go to the left column you see Bone source and below that you see you can click on the radically simple tool which is a wonderful point of care tool. The clinical guidelines are right there.

Letter to the dentist is right in there as well as even osteoporosis order set.

So here is the dental letter. It's pretty specific. You can modify it to be Less detailed for your patient.

This is one of my favorite slides comparing the risk of atypical femoral fractures in onj of the jaw with the use of osteoporosis medications to the risk of being injured by a seatbelt compared to the benefit of wearing a seatbelt.

You know, it's hard. We don't see patients walking down the street and say, wow, she didn't have a hip fracture.

So it's just, it's hard to see.

But if I ask patients if they wore a seatbelt coming here, they generally always do. And I relate that relative risk and benefit to the seatbelt, to using an osteoporosis medication and preventing fractures.

So let's talk a little bit about the bisphosphonate holiday. We want to put patients on a bisphosphonate using an oral bisphosphonate for five years or the IV for three years and then get another DEXA scan.

I usually would have gotten a DEXA scan in that interval anyway. And if the dexas improve with the T score better than minus 2.5, if they haven't had a fracture during the interval period, we want to consider taking a drug holiday.

We know that the bone mineral density with Fosamax, really with alendronate or with any of the oral bisphosphonates, really zoledronic acid as well, really only increases for about three years and then it plateaus after the five year point. There has been shown to be a decreased risk in burt fractures, but not hip fractures.

So it makes sense at three years with the IV zoledronic acid in five years for oral bisphosphonates to take a look at the DEXA scan and continue stopping the medication. Usually when we stop the medication, this is a drug holiday, it's not drug retirement.

So it's only for two years. And if the patients at that point are high risk, still, you might want to continue the oral bisphosphonate out to 10 years and the IV bisphosphonate out to 6 years and then get another DEXA scan.

But I would stop it. Ten years of bisphosphonate, six years of the zoledronic acid, even for those high risk patients, and consider other tools, other medications at that time.

So the drug holiday does not equal drug retirement pretty much. I explain to patients, you know, one simplistic way, if there aren't other contraindications or is to take up asphosphonate for five years, we get a DEXA scan if everything looks good, if their Bones have improved.

We take a break for two years. We get another DEXA scan at the end of that two years and decide at that point, do we want to restart a bisphosphonate, do we want to. And maybe that time we would just repeat the bisphosphonate for two or three years, maybe not all the way out to five years and get a DEXA scan. And if it seems to have stabilized, then take another holiday and sequence on and off alendronate, really?

Or residuinate throughout a lifetime in two to three year intervals.

So fortunately, we know the risk of that atypical femoral fracture.

It resolves quickly at just one year of a holiday. But the fracture risk does start to increase after about two years after stopping the bisphosphonate.

So we do want to resume therapy even without a DEXA if a fracture occurs and when the patient meets the initial treatment criteria.

So if there's regression of bone loss or fracture while on an oral bisphosphonate, we want to assess for compliance and consider an IV bisphosphonate or maybe another agent.

We also want to reevaluate for secondary causes that may have developed or we may have even missed the first time. Make sure they're taking adequate calcium in their diet, supplementing if needed.

So we can see that bisphosphonates have several roles. They're used in the initial treatment of osteoporosis as the last treatment for anabolic treatment sequence to maintain the benefits. We're going to talk about in a minute after an anabolic medication is used. Those are the injections.

Then we want to follow that by an oral bisphosphonate, kind of maintain that bone gain that was brought on with the anabolic medications treatment after denosamibe to avoid those withdrawal fractures. We'll talk more about this. But the oral bisphosphonate, specifically Lendronate, is the only medication we know that we can transition patients to alpha prolia onto and prevent those vertebral fractures. There are studies ongoing using the IV zoledronic acid, but the anabolic medications have not been shown to decrease the discontinuation fractures.

But the oral alendronate at the time of transition off of prolia. I usually start that a month before the next prolia shot would be due.

So I make sure that the patient is tolerating the medication and then go off the prolia and continue on a larender nape for at least one year, optimally two years after that, and then considering a drug holiday and then we know that bisphosphonates can be used in that long term maintenance of bone, of maintaining bone mineral density to sequencing off and on every two to three years.

So we've already talked a little bit about Prolia.

Prolia is a fantastic drug, Denosomide. It continues to build the bone up for 10 years. It is an image or sub Q injection in the office every six months.

So with COVID and with insurance reimbursement, it can be a bit of a management responsibility, making sure that your patients are getting in to get this shot and can still afford it.

But it does increase density for 10 years, continues to increase the bone density.

So the difficulty is discontinuing it and transitioning off.

So I like to have a discontinuation plan before I start patients on prolia. I think my patients on Prolia now are something that will come to me on Prolia.

And you wonder what do I do? And if it is time to come off Prolia, if they can't afford it, if their insurance has stopped covering it, or if their T scores have normalized, then transitioning to alendronate is what I would advise. But one of the main schools of thought out there now is to use denosamide in our older patients who will never have to stop taking it. But that doesn't depend on insurance coverage, which does change time to time.

So transitioning off the nosemide a little bit more.

So, as you say, if your patient has dental work to be done, what we try to do is to time that dental surgery, say, oh, six weeks before when their prolia shot would be due, and then try not to, to delay the prolia shot because there is an increased risk of 14%, increased risk of vertebral fractures during that time period.

What sometimes we have to do, because a lot of our patients may be on Prolia because they didn't tolerate the oral bisphosphonates, is we try to use zoledronic acid. But the study so far with zoledronic acid, it's still kind of pending there is because zoledronic acid really only goes to those bone cells that are turning over, highly turning over.

And that doesn't, we don't know exactly when that is. When patients stop for olia, that's individualized.

So some experts will get a CTX that's simply just the blood draw, the ctx, the bone turnover marker. And when that starts to elevate, then rush your patient in and get the zoledronic acid.

And then the thought is to repeat that zoledronic acid infusion in six months to kind of catch that window.

Some people will just give the zole right when the prolia is due the zoledronic acid, and then repeat it at six, six months.

So it is a bit of a management responsibility to have patients on prolia, really encourage them not to be late for their infusions, their prolia shot. And then when it is time to stop, you do want to plan that out, advise them, please don't just stop.

Need to make a plan to transition probably over to hopefully over to an oral bisphosphonator, possibly to zoledronic acid.

So, as we mentioned, estrogen is just not recommended by the ACP because that increased risk of stroke and thromboembolic events. You can consider raloxifen to prevent vert fractures in women with high risk of breast cancer. Calcitonin does decrease vert fractures by 30%, but because the association with malignancies, we don't use it for a long period of time.

It can help with the pain after the vert fracture.

Let's talk about our anabolic agents now.

So the new guidelines suggest using an anabolic agent, either either romozosomide, which is avenidine, which is an anisclerosin inhibitor, that's a shot given once a month in the office for 12 months, or using a parathyroid hormone derivative. Parathyroid hormone, yes, derivative.

So our oldest and generic there is teriparatide. The brand name is Forteo. Teriparatide has been out for decades.

We know quite a bit about it.

And ideally, we want to start with that anabolic daily shot. Teriparatide is usually a daily shot for 18 months to two years, and then that needs to be followed by an antiresorptive, such as alendronate. But getting it paid for by insurance is a tough part. I think every patient would probably benefit by starting with an antibiotic and then moving to your anaerosoptif, but it's getting it paid for, so it's really appropriate.

The insurance companies will cover it if that T score is low, especially minus 3 or lower, and they have a fracture, Vertebral fracture, another fracture. Remember, only bisphosphonates safely precede holidays.

So as far as contraindications, what we want to counsel patients on before they go onto forteo is we want to to be sure that they don't have any history of skeletal radiation or hypercalcemia or any skeletal malignancy or Paget's Disease. One thing about FORTEO is it does need to be refrigerated.

The sister medication, Tymlos or Valiparatide does not. But abaliperatide does not have the hip fracture data that FORTEO does. I think that's why Forteo is the medication in the ACP guideline. But remember, following any of the any of the anabolics, we've got to use an antiresorptive to maintain that bone mineral density gain.

So here's the newest medication, Romazosomide, or Avenida. It is a monoclonal antibody to sclerostin. It's given in the office once a month. It's actually two shots in the arm once a month.

It initially did not make it through the FDA because of major cardiac events, so it has now. But we do not want to use it if the patient has had a stroke or an MI in the preceding year. The risks with avenity are hypocalcemia, onj and atypical femoral fractures. Just like our other medications, treatment does need to be followed by an anaerosorptive agent.

As we said before, its function is primarily anabolic. It does have some antiresorptive activity too.

So interval during treatment. Once our patients are on medication, we want to see them back once a month, once a year.

We want to ask if they have any thigh or groin pain, make sure they're keeping up with their dentist, see if they've had any interval height loss. 0.8 inches in a year would be too much.

If so, repeat the vfa, the vertebral fracture assessment and see if they've possibly had a vert fracture. We want to check their labs, including creatinine, calcium, magnesium and vitamin D. Do maintain the diagnosis of osteoporosis even if your patients have improved on medication.

Just like with diabetes. We continue to code diabetes, but it's treated diabetes. Same with osteoporosis.

So as far as getting DEXA scans, when patients are on treatment, how often?

Well, there are different schools of thought as we know. The ACP said to wait five years. I think most people feel like getting a DEXA scan at the two year intervals to make sure there's not significant bone loss is appreciated generally by the patients and it is paid for.

So healthy bones for life.

Primary prevention. We do want to get a DEXA scan on all women age 65 and older. That is a quality marker we want to try to meet. And we'll repeat that Texas scan depending on the initial T score and fracture for we want to educate everybody of all ages about the universal bone health recommendations.

We know building those bones up until the age of 30 and then continuing a good diet, rich in calcium and vitamin D and exercise is great for a lifetime. Consider using our physical therapist registered dietitians to help with some of this. You can use the chronic care management code in your office to help patients understand especially the non pharmacologic recommendations of osteoporosis. Osteoporosis is certainly a disease that has a lot of patient education associated with it.

You might want to consider starting an osteoporosis support group in your community. We had one here for eight years and it was very enjoyable. Every month we had a different community speaker come in, Be it an endocrinologist or radiologist or an orthopedist or a yoga instructor or a Tai chi instructor, just various physical therapists came and spoke.

So consider that patients really appreciate having a resource of osteoporosis in their community.

And we also want to help prevent secondary fractures.

So your hospital may have a secondary fracture prevention program called a fracture liaison program where a nurse or another provider may go by and see patients after they've had a fracture, possibly their employees of ordinary orthopedic group or the hospital, and try to counsel patients after a fracture on preventing another fracture. These are some of the programs American Orthopedic Associations programs called Own the bone for patients who have had a fracture. As far as when to start the bisphosphonate, say after hip fracture, I usually wait two weeks.

Just at least let the patient get home. If they can take an oral bisphosphonate, that would be great when they're able to set up and take that once a week. But there's no reason to delay starting in bisphosphonate treatment after a hip fracture. Of course, if you can happen to get an anabolic approved such as teriparatide, you could start with that for two years and then move over to the bisphosphonate after that.

So we do know as far as age goes, when to stop treating patients. Do we treat a patient who's 90? Well, in geriatrics we try not to just look at that chronologic age, but look at the overall functioning. And we know that these medications ingredients decrease the risk of fracture at just a year.

So yes, if I had a 90 year old who developed came in and we did a DEXA scan and she had osteoporosis, maybe I hadn't seen her before, then I would recommend treating with the Lynchronate if she was living a full life and out walking and exercising because that fractured data, fracture data does show it's decreased at only one year.

So that's fantastic. Remember to check everybody over the age of 50 who's had a fracture even if it's, you know, off their bike or pickleball. I think a bike is probably about the same height as if we're standing.

So do get a DEXA scan and look for osteoporosis and osteopenia and help your patients understand how they can prevent further fractures.

So we can't really talk about osteoporosis without talking about fall prevention because over 90 I saw one statistic is actually over 98% of the fractures happen from falling. And the one thing we know to help decrease falls and fractures is exercise. Our multifactorial interventions such as the CDC study program is excellent.

It only got a C recommendation. But certainly we'll want to look at our patients medications to help prevent them being on medications that may increase their risk of falling that they don't need to be on. Look at their medical conditions, see if we can optimize that any orthostatic hypotension and give recommendations for that such as stockings, hydration, standing up slowly, exercises before they stand up from bed or from the chair and to look at environmental hazards in the home. It's been shown that vitamin D supplementation is not needed in our community dwelling adults.

But these are people without osteoprenia or without osteoporosis and without vitamin D deficiency.

So how do you know if someone has vitamin D deficiency? I do check vitamin D levels pretty often and a common code that I will use is long term medication use and then I'll put the vitamin D on my patient's annual labs. But there hasn't been a lot of data to show that that is recommended.

But we do know that patients who are deficient and insufficient in vitamin D are not going to have optimal bone health. They're not going to absorb the calcium as much. But in community dwelling adults who are not deficient in vitamin D, we do not need the supplement.

So overall we want to practice teaching about bill and health for all of our patients.

Get the Texas scan on all of our women over 65 men who have had a fracture or other risk factors and we can use the FRAC score to help us determine that if that frax major risk is greater than 8.4, consider getting a DEXA. Consider VFA, the Fracture Assessment Tool or the TBS that's that quality marker tool on the DEXA scan to help identify patients at fracture. Remember, meds can reduce the risk of fracture at one year. Evaluate for the bisphosphonate holiday with both ADEXA and a vertebral fracture assessment because you don't want your patient to have had a silent vert fracture during that treatment period because if they did that would be a finding that would we would recommend continuing on the bisphosphonate past five years on out an oral to 10 years or an IV from instead of just three years out to six.

We do want to counsel our patients on prolia about discontinuing it to talk to us. We need to transition them off and to not just stop it and to not be late for their medications. The fractures discontinuation Fractures have been seen as early as just eight months after the last injection and we want to encourage our patients to exercise to decrease their fracture and fall risk.

So I really appreciate you listening to this lecture.

Please feel free to email me any questions I can have. Quite a passion. Frosty Pros would love to talk to you about it and I hope you enjoy the rest of the conference. Thank you.

---

Generated by WhisperAI
https://whisperai.com