WhisperAI Transcription Report

Title: osteoporose-1
Date: 11/19/2025
Duration: 3314 seconds
Language: auto

---

TRANSCRIPTION:

My name is Julia Charles. I'm an associate physician and assistant professor in the Division of Rheumatology at Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School. Today we'll be talking about osteoporosis. A little bit about me.

I was trained at UCSF and I've been on faculty at Brigham since 2011 and I have a clinical interest in osteoporosis and glucocorticoid induced osteoporosis. Specifically. These are my disclosures. This is an outline of our talk for today, and we're going to start with a brief introduction to osteoporosis.

The definition of osteoporosis that we use comes from a National Institutes of Health consensus development conference from 2000. In that conference, osteoporosis was defined as a skeletal disorder characterized by compromised bone strength that predisposes a person to an increased risk of fracture. That definition states that bone strength is a reflection of both bone quality and bone density or bone quantity. As you can see in this image here, normal bone has very thick trabeculae that are highly interconnected, where in an osteoporotic bone the trabeculae themselves are very thin and you have areas of trabecular discontinuity for example here, and that discontinuity and loss of architecture decreases the bone quality as well as decreasing bone quantity.

Bone loss at is actually a twofold problem in osteoporosis, a problem of both increased resorption and incomplete repair. As you probably are aware, bone is being constantly remodeled by the opposing actions of bone forming osteoblasts and bone forming osteoclasts. This goes on all the time and rapidly. Under physiologic conditions, skeletal turnover will occur approximately every 10 years.

In osteoporosis or inflammatory arthritis bone there is a mismatch between bone loss and bone formation. Overactive osteoclasts lead to an increased resorption, while deficiencies in osteoblast formation bone formation lead to an incomplete repair. The tipping of these scales towards resorption ultimately leads to low bone mass. Because of this twofold problem, there's actually two strategies for treatment that you can either aim to restore the balance by increasing bone formation with anabolic agents or by decreasing bone resorption by inhibiting osteoclast activity with antiresorptives.

Just throughout the talk, I'll try and put in a little bit of the basic science that I think might be fair game for the boards here. We're just going to Talk a little bit about osteoclast differentiation. The increased bone resorption that we see in osteoporosis is due to an increase in the number and activity of the osteoclasts. This is the only cell type known to resorb.

Bone osteoclasts differentiate from hematopoietic precursors and they require specific cytokines, of which RANK ligand is the one that you should remember. This is the key cytokine necessary to drive formation of the osteoclasts and maintain their activity. RANK ligand is produced by bone lining cells and osteoblasts that are adjacent to the site of resorption. And RANK ligand is the molecular target of one of our antiresorptive drugs, denosumab.

In contrast, osteoblast precursor activity differentiation activity is driven by a number of different signaling pathways, Wnts, TGFs, BMPs, and IGF, one of which will really just focus on the WNT pathway. And I think that might be fair game for the BOARDS because it is the target of one of the newest osteoporosis medications, romosozumab, which works by promoting this WNT pathway in osteoblast activity.

Now we're going to talk a little bit about the diagnosis of osteoporosis and osteopenia. Bone mineral density, or bmd, is measured by dual energy x ray absorptometry, and this is a test that provides information about the aerial BMD at three sites, femoral neck, lumbar spine and distal radius.

The definition of osteoporosis is based on this aerial BMD with a T score of less than minus 2.5 in postmenopausal women or in men over 50 giving a patient a diagnosis of osteoporosis. For clinical purposes, we talk about osteoporosis and osteopenia and normal bone density. And the definition for these and the T score cutoffs that define these came from a 1994 WHO working group and they're essentially opinion based.

So although we say osteoporosis less than t squared minus 2.5, it's important to remember that the osteopenic patients are also at risk for fracture.

And in fact, the majority of fragility fractures actually occur in patients with osteopenia and not osteoporosis.

And so the fracture risk is really a continuum across the spectrum of low bone mineral density. I just think it's very important to emphasize that the definition of osteoporosis based on T score is really only valid in postmenopausal women and men over 50. Additionally, there are several limitations to bone mineral density testing.

There's no assessment of bone quality and as we know, bone quality also contributes to fracture risk.

There's also a lack of a universal reference calibration for bone densitometry. This means that sequential scans should be performed on the same machine. Osteoporosis can also be diagnosed clinically based on the occurrence of a fragility fracture of the vertebrae or hip.

A fragility fracture is a fracture occurring over age 50 in the absence of major trauma, and it can also include morphometric vertebral fractures that are noted incidentally on imaging. How about the diagnosis of osteoporosis in younger patients for premenopausal women and men younger than 50? We don't use a bone densitometry cutoff value to make the diagnosis. Instead, for younger patients we talk about the Z score.

That's how the bone mineral density is compared to age matched individual. A Z score of less than minus 2.0 is considered low bone density for chronologic age. Note we don't call this osteopenia or osteoporosis, but just low bone density for chronologic age. The diagnosis of osteoporosis in these younger individuals is a clinical diagnosis based on fragility fracture.

That's the diagnosis.

Now we're going to talk about who should be screened for osteoporosis. Bone density measurement with DEXA is recommended for women age 65 years and older, men age 70 and older, postmenopausal women and men 50 to 69 with risk factors and in any individual with a fragility fracture over age 50. This comes from the guidelines through the Bone Health and Osteoporosis foundation, and it's consistent with those of the Endocrine Society guidelines.

In contrast, the U.S. preventative Services Task Force has more conservative guidelines recommending bone densitometry in women 65 years or older in younger women with risk factors, and does not recommend for or against bone density screening in men. What risk factors would you want to know about that might help you decide whether a patient should be screened for osteoporosis? We have the clinical risk factors of advanced age being female estrogen deficiency, low body mass index, people who smoke, who are heavy drinkers of alcohol, who have low physical activity, vitamin D deficiency or low calcium intake.

We also have some diseases that are associated with osteoporosis and I think for the purpose of a rheumatologist, the important ones to think about are vitamin D deficiency, rheumatoid arthritis and spondyloarthritis.

There's also selected associated medications of which steroids are by far and away the most important, especially for us as rheumatologists. And we'll be talking more about steroid induced osteoporosis in the last section of this this talk. It's important to note that several commonly used medications are risk factors for osteoporosis, including SSRIs and proton pump inhibitors as well as aromatase inhibitors, anticonvulsants, particularly carbamazepine, which stimulates vitamin D metabolism and is associated with high bone turnover and antiretrovirals. In particular tenofovir, Dyson, Proxyl fumarate or TDF is associated with osteoporosis.

When you think about what we've talked about so far and let's see how we apply it to a case, this is a 46 year old woman with a compression fracture of the spine. She had sudden onset of pain opening a window. She's healthy, she's premenopausal, she does have a history of vitamin D deficiency but no other risk factors. She has a family history of osteoporosis and she has a bone density report from another facility that says that she has a spine T score of minus 3.4 and a Z score of minus 2.0.

You give her a diagnosis of osteoporosis because A her spine T score is less than minus 2.5, B her spine Z score is minus 2.0 or C because of her compression fracture. The correct answer is C compression fracture. The T score is not applicable in a premenopausal woman and should not have been included in her bone density report. The Z score gives her a diagnosis of low bone density for age, but her compression fracture is sufficient to give her a clinical diagnosis of osteoporosis.

Thinking about this woman again, what kinds of workup would you want to do now that you know that she has osteoporosis? In addition to a CBC and CMP or what other tests would you include a PTH, calcium, phosphorus, vitamin D and 24 hour urine calcium and creatinine B Spep with immunofixation electrophoresis C a ttg, IGA or D All of the above. And the answer is D all of the above.

So that brings us to our next section in which we'll discuss what laboratory evaluation is recommended for a patient with osteoporosis.

Let's talk about the laboratory evaluation for secondary causes of osteoporosis. There's a long laundry list of different laboratory tests that can be done. It's important to recognize that there is no data that tells us about what the most cost effective approach to osteoporosis screening laboratories is and practices vary widely. I'm going to share with you the approach that I take for tier one testing.

We have a CBC and then chemistries, particularly the creatinine, alkaline phosphatase and albumin. The creatinine is essential both to rule out CKD as a contributor to bone disease as well as for choosing a therapeutic approach. The albumin helps you rule out liver disease, while the alkaline phosphatase can be informative regarding whether the patient might have osteomalacia or the rare genetic disease hypophosphatasia.

I also get a calcium, phosphorus and PTH as well as a vitamin D to assess whether or not calcium handling is intact.

A normal phosphorus is also important for excluding ultra rare causes of bone fragility like tumor induced osteomalacia or Fanconi syndrome, TSH and testosterone. Look for common hormonal contributions to low bone density, either hyperthyroidism or hypogonadism. A 24 hour urine calcium and creatinine is useful to look for renal wasting of calcium, particularly in patients with a history of renal stones, and an SPEP IFV is useful for ruling out multiple myeloma MGUs and can help you understand whether an SPEP with immunofixation electrophoresis is important to evaluate for multiple myeloma and is also important to know whether a patient has mgus before you consider some anabolic therapies. Tier 2 laboratory evaluations would include a tissue transglutaminase antibody looking for celiac disease.

It's important to note that some celiac patients may present with osteoporosis as their only symptom and so if you have particularly in the case of a very low Z score, you might consider doing this even in someone who doesn't have a history of diarrhea. An evaluation Connective tissue diseases Tier 3 tests are tryptase looking for mast cell disorders and then a number of other hormonal assays and then lastly bone biopsy which is infrequently done in the US currently.

So now that we've talked about the laboratory evaluation, we should discuss who should be treated for osteoporosis so patients with vertebral or hip fractures should absolutely be treated regardless of their bone mineral density results because that is a clinical diagnosis of osteoporosis and patients with current fracture are at high risk of future fracture. Patients with a T Score less than minus 2.5 should be treated and patients with osteopenia or low bone density for age and a history of fracture are high risk of fracture should be considered for treatment.

How do we quantify risk of fracture in those patients with osteopenia where we're not sure whether treatment should be initiated or not? The FRAX tool allows you to estimate the 10 year risk for fracture based on the patient's femoral neck bone mineral density as well as clinical fractures. Here's an example calculation for a 70 year old woman with a history of fracture and rheumatoid arthritis who's previously been treated with glucocorticoids.

So remember this glucocorticoid adjustment of the risk.

You answer yes if the patient has ever been on more than three months of 5 milligrams or more of prednisone or equivalent.

So this will really include Many of our rheumatologic patients will get a yes in this tick box and these clinical variables along with entering the bone mineral density allow you to Derive the estimated 10 year risk of major osteoporotic fracture. That's a combination of spine, shoulder, wrist, pelvis and hip or hip fracture alone. How do we decide in a patient with osteopenia whether to treat?

There's data about the threshold at which treatment is cost effective in the US if the risk of hip fracture in the next 10 years is 3% or greater, or the risk for major osteoporotic fracture is 20% or greater, it's considered cost effective to treat for to reduce the risk of future fracture.

So it's important to recognize that there are several limitations of frax. It's intended for use in postmenopausal women and men over age 50, so it's not as useful in our younger patients. It's not validated for patients currently or previously treated for osteoporosis.

It underestimates the risk fracture in patients who have a low spine bone mineral density but relatively preserved hip bone mineral density.

Now it's possible to adjust for this discordance between the bone mineral densities at the two sites and I put in a reference that reviews how to do that.

It also doesn't include fall as a risk factor. And yet we know Fall is an important clinical risk factor for fracture.

Again, there is a way of adjusting FRAX for fall if you're interested in looking at that.

It also underestimates risk in patients with multiple osteoporosis related fractures because fracture is included as a yes, no answer rather than as a number of fractures.

Now that we've talked about, who should be treated, I.e. anyone with a clinical fragility fracture of the hip or spine, patients with a T score less than minus 2.5 and osteopenic patients with the FRAX score. FRAX risk of fracture greater than 3% for the hip and greater than 20% for major osteoporotic fractures.

We can talk about what kinds of therapies we should use and review the benefits and risks of each of our therapies. In the treatment of osteoporosis, there are universal recommendations for non pharmacologic interventions, that's calcium D and exercise, and then a number of pharmacologic interventions which can be broadly divided into two categories, the antiresorptives and the anabolics.

So universal non pharmacologic recommendations are to get adequate calcium intake, that's 1,000 to 1,200 milligrams a day, preferably from a dietary source, and to get adequate vitamin D supplementation. Recommendations are between 600 and 1000 units per day with varying recommendations from different societies.

But your goal vitamin D level in an osteoporotic patient is between 30 and 50 nanograms per mil.

So weight bearing exercise is another extremely important non pharmacologic intervention that you can recommend to your patients. In fact, of all the non pharmacologic interventions, only resistance exercise has been shown to increase bone mineral density in postmenopausal women. Smoking cessation is another important recommendation, as well as avoiding excess alcohol and of course fall avoidance.

And that might include referral for gait and balance physical therapy, for example. Just a word about vitamin D.

So there is a very recent publication from the Endocrine Society guideline that discusses the role of vitamin D for disease prevention.

So in this guideline a new recommendation has been made against routine testing of serum vitamin D levels in healthy individuals.

Now this is not your osteoporotic patient, so we still test vitamin D levels in individuals with osteoporosis. And the other important change to note is that the term vitamin D insufficiency is no longer endorsed and a serum level of vitamin D of vitamin D of 20 nanograms per mil is considered adequate for most individuals needs, although again in the patients with osteoporosis we we're typically aiming for a goal level of 30 to 50. Additionally, empiric vitamin D recommendation is recommended for individuals under age 18, for the very old, for the pregnant and for in pre diabetes, but not in those ages 19 to 74.

Now we'll talk about pharmacologic interventions.

We have the two classes, the antiresorptives and the osteoanabolics.

So first we're going to talk about the antiresortorative of these. We are not going to discuss calcitonin, which is now primarily used for the treatment of pain related to compression fractures. And we won't discuss hormone replacement therapy, which is FDA approved for osteoporosis prevention but not treatment.

So first we'll discuss raloxifene. This is a selective estrogen receptor modulator. It's dosed orally daily.

It also is used for breast cancer risk reduction in high risk women.

It's not indicated for men and it's contraindicated if there's a history of thromboembolism. Side effects include hot flashes, hypertriglyceridema, thrombosis and increased risk of death in individuals who suffer a stroke. This is primarily used to stabilize bone density. It has benefits for fracture risk reduction at the spine but not at the hip, and is generally considered a less potent antiresorptive agent compared to our most commonly used antiresorptive class, the bisphosphonates.

So bisphosphonates are available as either oral or IV agents. In the US there are three available oral agents that are typically dosed either weekly as an alendronate and residuenate, or monthly as an abandronate. Importantly, alendronate and residuenate are also available monthly if the patient finds that More convenient IV agents available are zoledronic acid, which is dosed yearly, and ibandronate, which is dosed quarterly. Bisphosphonates work by inhibiting G protein prenelation that leads to cytoskeletal disorganization and a loss of the resorption capability of osteoclasts as well as the osteoclast death through apoptosis.

Bisphosphonates are attracted to sites of rapid bone turnover. They actually bind to the hydroxyapatite of the bone and they have a prolonged lifespan in the bone. They're not metabolized and they're basically buried in the bone where they remain inactive for up to 10 years. They're then activated by osteoclastic resorption, as you can see here, where they're released locally and then lead to death of the osteoplast.

We'll talk for a minute about zolendronic acid. Although this is FDA approved for every 12 month dosing, it's important to note that there is a recent randomized placebo controlled trial using every 18 month dosing over four doses over six years. This was done in a group of women with postmenopausal women with osteopenia. And this dosing of zolendronic acid was effective in reducing fragility fractures as well as specifically nonvertebral and vertebral fragility fractures.

Now we'll talk about another case and try and see how what we've just learned applies. This is a 72 year old woman with postmenopausal osteoporosis, a T score of -2.6 at the femoral neck and no fracture history. Despite four years of alendronate, her bone mineral density at all sites continues to decline. She is not responding to alendronate.

You advise her to A increase the time between taking alendronate and eating to 60 minutes. B switch therapy to zolendronic acid. C switch therapy to teriparatide. Are D, A and B?

So the answer here is A or B. A likely explanation for failure of the laundromate here is inadequate GI absorption. As you may remember, the bisphosphonates have oral bioavailability of less than 1%. It's very important to review how the patient is taking alendronate.

Making sure that they're not taking it with food, that they're taking it on an empty stomach, and increasing the time between taking the medication and eating is another approach to try to increase absorption. You could also eliminate the whole issue of GI absorption by switching to zolendronic acid. Her risk of fracture is relatively low and so switching to teriparatide is not the best option here.

So what about contraindications so you avoid them?

If the EGFR is between 30 and 35 mils per minute and the exact cutoff depends on the particular agent. You want to correct vitamin D deficiency prior to administration. And this is important because bisphosphonates can cause hypocalcemia and vitamin D sufficiency allows for adequate calcium absorption to prevent that. For oral preparations, as we just discussed, it's very important that they're taken in the morning on the empty stomach with nothing else but water for 30 to 60 minutes.

It's important also to remain upright to reduce the risk of pill esophagitis. They're poorly absorbed as we discussed, and you want to avoid them in the case of severe reflux, Barrett's or other esophageal pathology.

And also we avoid them in patients who've had gastric bypass. For bisphosphonates, there are a number of potential adverse events.

First we'll just talk about those that are specific for oral agents. That's increased reflux, upper GI symptoms. Then for IV agents the specific reaction that we to think about is acute phase reaction that we'll talk about in a little bit more detail. But it's basically a flu like reaction that can include fever, myalgia, sweep and arthralgias.

Both oral and IV agents share a risk for hypocalcemia. As we discussed before, renal toxicity can be seen. This is more of an issue with IV agents and is limited to those with low creatinine clearance at baseline. Both oral and IV agents share a risk of atypical femur fracture and osteonecrosis of jaw.

And then another unique aspect of IV agents is there is a very, very rare but well described side effect of uveitis.

So we'll go back to our patient. She's a 72 year old woman with a T score of minus 2.6 of the femoral neck who failed alendronate.

So you did decide to switch her to zolendronic acid, but she's confused about this risk of infusion reaction that you counseled her about.

So you tell her that A infusion reactions are rare. Less than 5% of patients get them. B infusion reactions are common. They occur in 20 to 40% of patients.

But her risk is lower because of her prior alendronate exposure. C that she can use acetaminophen to eliminate the risk, D that she can use dexamethasone to eliminate the infusion reaction risk and E that infusion reactions only occur if she has low vitamin D. The correct answer here is B. Infusion reactions are very common.

These are fever, myalgia, headache and they're caused by elevated interferon gamma and tnf. This is thought to be a gamma delta T cell activation. While common, they're rarely severe. Severe acute phase reaction happens in less than 5% of patients.

Risk factors for acute phase reaction include younger age, low vitamin D levels and in Asian race. Prior bisphosphonate use is protective.

So if you've Had a patient who's been on an oral bisphosphonate, you can be very reassuring that they're unlikely to get an acute phase reaction. And if they do get one, it tends to be mild.

You can also use pretreatment to reduce the risk of acute phase reaction. And there are trials showing that acetaminophen 500 milligrams prior to and then every six hours starting four hours after the infusion, or dexamethasone 4 milligrams the day of and for two days after the infusion reduces the frequency of acute phase reactions by 50%. And the references for those trials are down here.

Now we're going to switch to another class of antiresorptives, denosumab.

This is a humanized neutralizing antibody to rank ligand. It's given as an every six months subcutaneous injection. There's no renal toxicity or adjustment for gfr. It's shorter acting, it does not reside in the bone and that leads to the problem of rebound resorption.

So if you stop denosumab, you will lose everything you gained by about one year after discontinuation. In addition, there's a well recognized risk now of rebound fractures after denosum MAB discontinuation if the patient is not switched to a different agent to a different antiresorptive agent. With denosumab, bone marrow density continues to increase over time without plateauing. And this is based on 10 year published data.

And so safety out to 10 years is recognized and there's no increased adverse event rate with the up to 10 years duration of dosing. In case two, we have that 72 year old woman again and she declined the B class that you recommend because of concerns for side effects. She says I'd like to switch to denosumab. You advise her that A denosumab is advantageous because it's not associated with osteonecrosis of the jaw or atypical femur fractures.

B, as with bisphosphonates, a drug holiday is recommended after 5 years. C denosumab will increase her risk of infection. Infection. D hypersensitivity reactions are rare.

The answer here is D hypersensitivity reactions are rare. The risk of osteonecrosis of the jaw is actually similar between denosumab and zoledronic acid. The risk for atypical femur fracture is possibly slightly lower, but it's not absent then because of this rebound resorption issue, drug holidays are not recommended for denosumab. If you look at patients who were persistent users of denosumab versus those who discontinue.

The relative risk for vertebral fracture was almost 5 and their relative risk for multiple vertebral fractures was almost 15, while the relative risk for any fracture was 3.2. Denosumab is a drug that you cannot discontinue to speak to the issue of infections, though increased risk of cellulitis was seen in the Freedom trial, which was the trial that led to denosumab's FDA approval. We can be quite reassured because there was a large study showing that the infection risk in RA patients on biologics and denosumab was equivalent to those RA patients on biologics plus zolendronic acid. Furthermore, a meta analysis of all the randomized controlled trials involving denosumab did not show an increased rate of infection, although the relative risk for serious infection was slightly higher.

Overall, I would say that the risk of infection that we can be relatively reassured that denosumab does not substantially increase the risk of infection. We've talked about two different classes of antiresorptives, the denosumab and bisphosphonates. Both of these drugs can, when they are used for long duration, cause prolonged suppression of bone turnover and this can have potential adverse effects. The idea here is that under normal physiologic conditions, if there's stress strain that causes a micro crack formation in the bone that will then activate the osteoclast to resorbase the cracked area of bone and stimulate new bone formation, leading to healing of the micro crack.

Here you can see a scanning electron microscope image of bone showing a crack coming right through the osteons. The prolonged use of antiresorptives, both bisphosphonates and denosumab by suppressing the ability to repair micro cracks. That's thought to lead to the two rare but the two rare adverse events associated with these drugs, both of which include atypical femur fracture and osteonecrosis of the jaw.

So atypical femur fracture is a fracture of the femoral shaft.

It's usually a transverse fracture that originates at the lateral cortex and it goes across the bone instead of the typical femur fracture which more often occurs through the femoral neck. Atypical femur fractures are rare, approximately 3 in 100,000 patient years. They often present as prodromal thigh or groin pain. Up to a third are bilateral.

If you diagnose a atypical femur fracture on one side, you should get bilateral femur films to see if the other side is affected. The median exposure to bisphosphonate was seven years in patients with atypical femur fracture and it's clear that the risk increases with prolonged duration and that after cessation of bisphosphonates the risk has been shown to decrease back down to baseline after one year. Glucocorticoid use also increases risk, so this is very relevant to our rheumatologic practice. Management of atypical femur fracture includes discontinuing the antiresorptive prophylactic nail fixation for incomplete fractures and considering the use of an osteoanabolic osteonecrosis of the jaw is the other rare but important to discuss potential adverse effect of antiresorptives.

This occurs in 1 10,000 to 1 in 100,000 individuals with increased frequency in patients who are being treated for cancer, who have high doses of glucocorticoids, are smokers or also have diabetes.

It's associated with dental extractions, dental implants and poorly fitting dentures. The dose and duration of therapy are also important and IV administration is thought to be slightly higher risk than oral prevention of osteonecrosis of the jaw. The most important thing to do is to get pretreatment dental screening and to get dental work done prior to initiation of the antiresorptive.

Although there's theoretical benefit to cessation of oral antiresorptives because of the long bone dwell time of these drugs, there's really not clear data that this is beneficial in terms of management. It's pain management, antibacterial rinses and then debridement as needed to control pain or infection. Because these two rare side effects are clearly associated with duration of treatment for bisphosphonates, we start thinking about what's called a bisphosphonate holiday, that is Stopping treatment and monitoring off of drug. The optimal duration of the bisphosphonate holiday has not been established, but two recent retrospective studies suggest that the risk of new clinical fractures is higher in patients who start a bisphosphonate holiday with a T score of worse than -2.5.

Patient selection and monitoring during this holiday are very important. When you're thinking about patients who've been treated with five or more years of oral or three or more years of Ib visit IV bisphosphonates. It's important to know are they high risk and that they've had osteoporotic fractures either before or during therapy and if yes, you might consider continuing the bisphosphonate or changing to an alternative therapy. If no and their bone mineral density scores are better than minus 2.5, you might consider a holiday.

If it's worse than minus 2.5 or you think they're at high risk fracture risk for another reason, you might continue bisphosphonate because if you feel that the risk of treatment is less than the benefit. However, if they're not at high risk, we definitely consider a drug holiday. But don't just stop the medication. You really need to reassess these patients every two to three years and consider restarting therapy if their bone mineral density drops.

Now we're going to talk about the other class of drugs. Anabolic agents are osteoantabolic agents and the first of these that we're going to talk about are the PTH receptor agonists. There are two drugs in this class, teriparatide, which is a recombinant fragment of human pth amino acids 1 to 34, and abaloparatide, which is a recombinant fragment of human pthrp amino acids 1 to 34. Both of these drugs activate the PTH receptor on osteoblasts and intermittent dosing has an anabolic effect effect on the bone.

And note that this is really distinct from the effect of hyperparathyroidism, which ends up activating osteoclastic resorption and leading to low bone density. Instead of chronic high PTH being bad for bone, intermittent dosing or intermittent stimulus of the PTH receptor is anabolic and improves bone formation. Both of these drugs are costly. Although a generic teriparatide is now approved, they are given by daily subcutaneous injection for 18 to 24 months and they must be followed by an antiresorptive to maintain the bone mineral density gains.

If you stop the medication, your bone mineral density will eventually drift down back towards your baseline over several years. These drugs, teriparatide and obaliparatide, are indicated for those at very high risk of fracture, so of T score less than minus 3.5 or T score less than minus 2.5. With fragility fractures, patients with multiple risk factors, including steroids or patients who have failed or are intolerant of previous therapy. Teriparatide is approved for both postmenopausal osteoporosis, male osteoporosis and glucocorticoid induced osteoporosis, whereas abaliparatide is currently approved only for postmenopausal osteoporosis Contraindications to these medications include hyperparathyroidism, so it's important to check that baseline pth, hypercalcemia, kidney stones and prior radiation involving the skeleton open growth plates and this is not an option for children, Paget's disease or other unexplained high alkaline phosphatase history of osteosarcoma or skeletal malignancy or metastasis.

Side effects include hypercalcemia, hypercalciuria which can include development of kidney stones and hyperuricemia which may be important to remember for those patients with underlying gout. There is a concern for osteosarcoma. When these drugs were first approved they had a black box warning stating that they could potentially increase osteosarcoma risk. This black box warning was removed move for teriparatide in November of 2020 and for obaliparatide in 2021.

Additionally, the 24 month lifetime limit for teripareptide was also removed such that teriparatide can now be considered for either serial courses or for longer term therapy. Common side effects of these medications are orthostatic hypertension, dizziness, palpitations and nausea.

Sometimes these are severe enough that they warrant discontinuation, but if the symptoms are mild, I try to encourage my patients to see whether they improve with continued use, which they often do. The second class of osteoanabolic is romosozumab.

This works in a completely different by a completely different mechanism than the PTH receptor agonists.

Romosozumab is a humanized neutralizing antibody to sclerostin and sclerostin is a WNT inhibitor. Remember back to the very beginning of the talk where we talked about how the WNT pathway is important for driving osteoprogenitors to differentiate into active osteoblasts to lay down the new bone. That process is inhibited by a WNT inhibitor called sclerostin made by osteocytes.

Romosozumab works as a neutralizing antibody that inhibits the sclerostin activity, allowing WNT signaling to occur promoting osteoblast. Function. In addition, it has a mild antiresorptive activity because it inhibits the expression of RANK ligand by osteoblasts and thus decreases bone resorption.

Romosozumab is given a clinician administered subcutaneous injections once a month for 12 months.

Each visit is actually two injections because it's a relatively large volume of drug that has to be given romosozumab was approved for postmenopausal women and the American College of Endocrinology guidelines suggest its use as a first line therapy in women at very high risk of fracture or prior fracture and a second line therapy in high risk women who are failed or intolerant of other agents. There's a randomized controlled trial that does show benefit in men but not yet approved in men. It increases spine bone mineral density more effectively than alendronate and it decreases the risk of vertebral fracture, non vertebral fracture and hip fracture compared to alendronate. The course is limited to 12 months because it gradually loses its anabolic effect over time and in fact the majority of the anabolic effect of romosozumab is seen in the first six months of the course.

If a patient completes a 12 month course of Romosozumab and does not follow it with an antiresorptive again, their bone mineral density will gradually decrease back to baseline. Contraindications of romosozumab are stroke RMI in the last 12 months, high risk for cardiovascular event, which is a relative contraindication, hypersensitivity and hypocalcemia. Possible side effects include headache, arthralgia, injection site reactions, hypercalcemia and then this increased risk for stroke, MI and cardiovascular death. Two large randomized trials led to the approval of romosozumab for postmenopausal osteoporosis.

In the first, the frame trial, which was romosozumab compared to placebo, there was no increased risk of atherosclerotic cardiovascular events. But in the second trial, Arch, which compared romosozumab to alendronate, there was an increased risk for the combined endpoint of MI and stroke seen in those patients on romosozumab. When those two trials are combined, the hazard ratio is approximately 1.3.

So when counseling patients about starting romosozumab, it's important to estimate their cardiovascular risk and allow them to understand how this would be changed if they were on the medication.

The increase in risk for stroke and MI is present while the patient is on romosozumab and it returns to baseline after the drug is discontinued. Considerations in choosing therapy are efficacy against vertebral versus nonvertebral fractures.

So for example with raloxifene where it decreases the risk of vertebral fracture but nonvertebral fracture, that might be a good choice in a patient with spine only osteoporosis but would be a Poor choice for a patient with low hip bone mineral density, ease of administration, adverse effect profile, the long term safety. Non skeletal effects can also be important.

For example with raloxifene, if a patient is at high risk for breast cancer, that might be a good choice. Cost and insurance coverage also play a role in this, with denosumab, romosozumab and the parathyroid receptor agonists being the more expensive options. Generic teriparatide, as I mentioned in the clinic, is available currently and two biosimilar denosumab options will be available, have been FDA approved and will be available starting in June of 2025. We've finished talking about osteoporosis in general and now I'd like to devote the last section of this talk to special considerations for therapy for our patients with glucocorticoid induced osteoporosis and to review the recently updated American College of Rheumatology guidelines.

When we reviewed risk factors for osteoporosis, we talked about steroids being one of the medications that increase the risk of osteoporosis. I think it's important to really take a look at how bad steroids are for bone. This is an old paper from 2000 looking at the association between glucocorticoid use and fracture risk. This is from the UK General Practice Research database.

It's a very large group of patients studied compared to match controls and importantly this only required one steroid prescription to be defined as a steroid user. You can see that even in those patients given very low dose, less than 2.5 milligrams of glucocorticoid A day, the risk of vertebral fracture was significantly increased. And in those high dose patients greater than 7.5 milligrams a day, both the hip of the risk of hip and the risk of vertebral fracture were significantly increased.

So I don't think we can really say that even very low dose glucocorticoids are safe for bone.

So how do steroids work and why are they bad for bone?

So they have multiple effects on the different types of bone cells. They work on both osteoclasts to enhance resorptions, causing rapid bone mineral decrease over the first six months of use. Then they also impair osteoblast survival and function.

So with prolonged use of glucocorticoids you have reduced bone formation and then they have a third effect which is that they induce apoptosis of the osteocyte. These are the bone embedded cells that are very important for mechanosensing and bone response to load and their death leads to a decrease in bone quality. This is thought to be why steroids increase the fracture risk beyond any effect that they have and decreasing bone mineral density to just get a sense of how they increase fracture risk. You can see that if you look at non glucocorticoid users in black versus glucocorticoid users in red.

And this is looking at lumbar spine bone mineral density T scores versus vertebral fracture risk. You can see that spine fractures are much higher at any given T score in glucocorticoid users than in non glucocorticoid users. That same relationship is seen with femoral neck BMD with vertebral fractures being much higher in those on steroids at any BMD.

So that leads us to the 2022 ACR guidelines on glucocorticoid induced osteoporosis.

So I'm going to break this up into three parts. Screening, risk, stratification and treatment. The recommendation is that in any patient starting glucocorticoids of more than 2.5 milligrams a day for an anticipated longer than three months duration that these patients should have an initial fracture risk assessment. This fracture risk assessment involves both assessment of the multiple clinical risks that the patient might have and then for younger adults, you'll do a bone mineral density with vertebral fracture assessment or a spinal X ray as soon as possible after starting glucocorticoids to understand what their baseline bone density is.

In adults over 40, you'll do a bone mineral density and you'll estimate their risk of fracture using frax. Again, FRAX is not applicable to to younger patients, which is why we're not using it in this arm of the algorithm.

Next, once you have your bone mineral density and clinical risk factors, you can risk stratify your patients. This is a relatively complicated algorithm that I don't want to go through in detail, but I would encourage you to take a look at in your own time.

It basically divides patients into those under 40 and those over 40. I we'd like to just highlight that a new category of very high risk patient has been introduced in these guidelines. These high risk patients are those with prior osteoporotic fractures, very low T scores, very high frax, calculated risk of fracture, or who are on high doses of steroids of greater than 30 milligrams a day for greater than 30 days or having a cumulative dose of greater than 5 grams a year, regardless of category fracture risk reassessment is recommended in these guidelines. Everyone to two years.

The last aspect of the guidelines that we'll talk about is treatment. Again, this treatment recommendations are divided into younger adults and older adults. I'd just like to draw your attention to the fact that regardless of age group, the low risk patients are. It's not recommended to treat moderate risk patients.

You could essentially use any of the available medications except for raloxifene or romosozumab, which are not recommended because the potential for harm is thought to exceed the benefit. Older patients at high risk are conditionally recommended to use one of the more potent agents, denosumab or PTHPTHRP over bisphosphonates. But regardless of what you use.

So these are conditional recommendations.

It's strongly recommended to use oral bisphosphonate over no treatment.

So the bottom line is basically it's very important to treat these patients. If oral bisphosphonates are what you can do, do that. But there's a conditional recommendation for these more potent agents over bisphosphonate in the very high risk patients.

Again, it's strongly recommended to treat with oral bisphosphonates over no treatment. But if other options are available, it's conditionally recommended to treat with the osteoantabolics PTHRP over an antiresorptive and then it's conditionally recommended to use denosumab IV bisphosphonate, riloxifene or romosozumab over no treatment. These treatment guidelines are complex and I think it's worth taking a look at them. But the basic message is that every patient going on steroids should be screened for osteoporosis risk, should have a bone density and risk stratification to help you help guide your treatment choice.

Unless they're at low risk, they should be treated with some type of fracture risk reduction agent. Again, fracture risk reassessment is recommended every one to two years.

Now we'll come to the questions to finish up this session. Question one.

There's 68 year old man with a spine T cell T score of -1.5, a hip T score of -1.6, a femoral neck T score of -2.0. A FRAX calculation demonstrates a 10 year risk of major osteoporotic fracture and hip fracture of 10% and 2.7% respectively.

So you would recommend the following a begin alendronate 70mg weekly b begin to Nosemab 60mg every six months c begin raloxifene 60mg daily or d no pharmacologic intervention. The answer to this is D no pharmacologic intervention.

This is because his frax calculated risk is below the threshold to recommend pharmacologic intervention. Remember, the thresholds for treatment are major osteoporotic fracture of 20% and a hip fracture risk of 3%. He's under those thresholds question two a 55 year old woman with a strong family history of breast cancer presents to discuss management of her osteoporosis. Her most recent DEXA is notable for a spine T score of minus 2.6, a hip T score of minus 1.1 and a femoral neck T score of minus 1.3.

She has never had a fracture. Her evaluation for secondary causes of osteoporosis is unrevealing. You would recommend the following a begin alendronate 70mgPO weekly b begin denosumab 60mg sub q q 6 months c begin raloxifene 60mg PO daily or d no pharmacologic intervention. The answer here is c begin raloxifene 60 milligrams daily.

The rationale here is she has osteoporosis by a T score of minus 2.5 in the spine. She should be treated so D is not an option. She's very young so you're concerned for potential large total lifetime exposure to bisphosphonates if you start her on a bisphosphonate and raloxifene would be a good alternative because it has a proven fracture reduction at the spine and it's approved for primary prevention of breast cancer.

So she would here be getting two potential benefits from raloxifene.

Question 3 A 62 year old woman develops giant cell arteritis and prednisone 60mg daily is started. She has a history of breast cancer with lumpectomy and xrt. Five years ago she had an nstemi. In the prior year her DEXA reveals a spine T score of minus 2.3, femoral neck T score of minus 0.9 and total hip T score of minus 1.4.

Her calculated frac score is 10% for major osteoporotic fracture and 1.5% for hip fracture. You start her on calcium and vitamin D and you recommend a monitor without therapy and repeat DEXA non year B Begin teriparatide C Begin romosozumab D Begin alendronate. She's a 62 year old woman, she has a history of XRT.

She's now starting high dose prednisone and her calculated FRAX score does not meet the treatment thresholds.

Let me rephrase this here we have the 62 year old woman with a history of XRT who's starting high dose steroids for glucocorticoids. She had osteopenia by her T score and her calculated frax does not meet the treatment thresholds.

So you recommend alendronate. And the rationale for this is by ACR guidelines she's very high risk due to the plan for prednisone of greater than 30mg for greater than 30 days and oral bisphosphonates are strongly recommended over no treatment.

Now remember that PTHPTHRP analogs are conditionally recommended over antiresorptives, but they're contraindicated for this patient due to her history of xrt.

Similarly, romosozumab is conditionally recommended over no treatment, but it's contraindicated because of her MI in the past year.

So in this patient, alentronate would be the correct choice.

So here are a few references for the talk and thank you for your attention and happy to take any questions.

---

Generated by WhisperAI
https://whisperai.com