WhisperAI Transcription Report

Title: Paradigm Shifts in Osteoporosis Treatment Treating to Target SY5
Date: 11/19/2025
Duration: 5516 seconds
Language: auto

---

TRANSCRIPTION:

Good morning, everyone. My name is Meg Crook and I'm pleased to be moderating this important symposium, Paradigm Shifts in Osteoporosis Treatment Treating to Target. This session will provide an update on fracture risk assessment, an overview of the relative efficacy of our current therapies, and a new algorithm for selecting initial therapy. We have three fantastic speakers, each talk lasting 25 minutes following followed by five minutes for questions.

Questions can be submitted through the app or better yet, asked at the microphones. Please respect the science. The Endocrine Society wants to encourage an environment of sharing and photography is not allowed in sessions unless stated otherwise by the presenters. And remember to silence your electronic devices.

Please join me in welcoming our first speaker, Dr. Felicia Kosman from Columbia University. Dr. Kaussman will be presenting on treating to target for osteoporosis. Thank you, Dr. Kossman. Well, thank you so much for that introduction and thanks to Suzanne Gendaber for inviting me to speak here today.

And thank you all for joining what hopefully is going to be a really fun session. These are, see.

Okay, I'm going to leave it there. These are my disclosures.

So the overarching goal, of course, of osteoporosis therapy is to prevent a first or a recurrent fracture. And a few years ago, the asp, ASBMR and the BHOF convened a task force to address the issue of goal directed osteoporosis therapy, with the overall concept that providing treatment goals would help ensure that the most appropriate therapies were chosen for specific patients at each stage of life and each severity of the disease. We think that the suggestions that we came out with that were published just about six months ago are consistent with the Endocrine Society and ACE guidelines. Importantly, we believe that both the treatment targets as well as the treatment choices should be individualized and based on a patient's underlying risk, taking taking into account the most important factors, fracture history, including the site, the recency and the number of fractures, bone density at the spine, total hip and femoral neck, and then some other underlying major risk factors, including of course, age.

So let me begin by providing the rationale for the treatment targets that that we selected. And we looked at this in three major categories of patients. The first are patients at imminent risk, which we defined using the Ferrari definition of at least 10% over the next two years for absolute risk of fracture. We looked at a separate category of patients with bone density levels in the osteoporosis range less than or equal to minus 2.5 with or without fracture.

And then those patients who Fracture with T scores above minus 2.5. And I know Richard is going to in the next session talk in more detail about imminent risk. I just wanted to provide just really one salient example, and this is in patients with recent clinical fracture. These data are from a Medicare database study of over 377,500 women age 65 and over with the first fracture.

This shows the risk of a recurrent fracture by site of the first fracture. You can see that the average risk for all of the fracture sites was 10% in the next year, obviously meeting that criteria for imminent risk. But obviously there's a fair amount of variability in the skeletal site and prediction of recurrent risk. When with the spine and pelvis producing the greatest subsequent fracture risk and the hip and humerus quite high, and then ankle is at the bottom of this list.

And maybe the one fracture type in this study that's not associated with imminent risk, defined as greater than 10% or more in the next two years. Importantly, those data looked at clinical spine fractures. That's the only way this can be done with a big datab based study. But we also know that the same principles apply to radiographically defined vertebral fractures.

Looking at this pooled placebo group study that was published many years ago now, patients with prevalent vertebral fracture, where the date was unknown in the pink, have a subsequent fracture risk of 5% in the next year, whereas those with a known incident fracture have a 20% risk of subsequent fracture in the next year.

So fourfold higher risk is seen. These fractures therefore acting very similarly to what we see with clinical spine fractures, then patients with multiple fractures might also be at imminent risk. Even if these fractures are not so recent.

But still the time from the last fracture and the fracture site remain important. If this occurred 20 years ago and was nothing but a minor ankle fracture, plus perhaps a minor wrist fracture that occurred 18 years ago, this patient may not be at imminent risk. Whereas more major fractures within the last decade are likely to still be at very high risk and imminent risk for these patients at imminent risk, where the fracture risk is so high, the goal is rapid maximal fracture reduction, they have also a BMD target.

Let's move now to that second category of patients who start with baseline T scores in the osteoporosis range at total hip, femoral, neck or spine.

Certainly, most guidelines, certainly in the United States recommend treatment for patients in this BMD range. And our starting point was that treatment should be recommended. The treatment target should be at least above where treatment is usually recommended to be initiated and that target makes some sense when you look at clinical trial data. These are old studies.

You'll recognize the Flex trial on the left. This is a long term alendronate study and, and what we're showing here is the relationship between T score attained after five years of Alendron 8 therapy and the subsequent risk of nonvertebral fracture over the next five years. While these patients were randomized to placebo, you can see that for those who are still in the osteoporosis range, the fracture risk is around 30%, whereas those who attain T scores above minus 2.5 and the middle or above minus 2 have a mitigation of that risk. The same observations were made from the Horizon Extension trial.

This is with three years of zoledronic acid. The T score attained after those three years predicts the risk of subsequent fracture, with that cut point of minus 2.5 being very important. We have more modern data with patients on denosumab for up to 10 years. In the Freedom and Freedom Extension trial, where the total hip T score attained at any point on denosumab therapy is a predictor of the risk of nonvertebral fracture in the next year.

For patients who still have a T score, for example, of minus 3 in the total hip, the one year ondinosumab, the one year subsequent nonvertebral fracture risk was 4%. Whereas if patients attained a T score of minus 2 on denosumab, the subsequent fracture risk was 2.5%. Importantly, when you break down that group of patients into those who did not have a prior fracture in green versus those who did have a prior fracture in blue, you can see that the relationship is maintained between T score attained and substantial fracture risk in both of those subgroups. However, at every T score attained, the risk of subsequent fractures substantially higher in people with the fracture history.

It makes sense when you look at data like this to suggest that a T score of -2.5 or above -2.5 might make a lot of sense for patients with no fracture history where the subsequent fracture risk would be under 3%, maybe 2.5%. Whereas for patients with a fracture history, in order to get to mitigate subsequent risk to that approximate level would require a T score at least above -2 or somewhere between -2 and -1.5. We believe that the treatment target needs to be determined on the basis of what your fracture history is. Importantly, I showed data for bisphosphonates for denosumab.

We also have these data for romosozumab from the ARCH trial. In this analysis, we looked at the T score attained in the total hip after one year of treatment with either one alendronate or romosozumab and the subsequent risk of nonvertebral fracture on the left, vertebral fracture on the right. You can see these are very strong relationships, very similar to what we saw with denosumab treatment when we looked at this for the spine T score achieved at one year and subsequent fracture risk. However, you see there is not a relationship between spine T score achieved and nonvertebral fracture, although that relationship is maintained with vertebral fracture.

As a result, we concluded that the total hip T score was the most important treatment target site because it predicts the risk of all subsequent fractures. The minimum treatment target should be above minus 2.5 at the respective sites, but higher T score target above minus 2 should be considered for patients with prior fractures. Other major risk factors perhaps age, of course, and also perhaps if a medication pause is being considered to provide some additional margin of error for a potential bone loss that might occur during the transition.

So now let's move to that third category of patients.

These are patients with fractures and ABA baseline T score, which is already above -2.5. These are common.

We know that more than 50% of fractures do occur in patients who have T scores above osteoporosis level, and we have much less information here to determine what the T score target should be. We do know, of course, from Richard's work and the SABR panel that bone density increments with treatment versus placebo from a giant number of clinical trials and a big meta analysis are associated with fracture risk reduction.

When they compared patients with baseline T scores above or below minus 2.5. It doesn't seem to make a difference that BMD increments of the same approximate level are still associated with similar fracture risk reduction magnitudes. The best we could do here was not to provide an actual T score target, but instead to provide a treatment target that relates to an incremental improvement in BMD of about 3% for the total hip and 5% for the lumbar spine. Those correspond at least in one osteoporotic population to T score units of about 0.2 for the total hip and 0.5 for the lumbar spine.

So now we've provided the rationale for the three different classifications of treatment targets. How do these affect the treatment strategies for patients who are at imminent risk of fracture? Where the target is A rapid and maximal reduction in fracture risk.

We also of course have a T score above -2 because these are patients with fracture history, obviously.

Or if they start with a T score above minus 2.5, at least increments of 3% and 5%. But focusing really on the top goal, rapid and maximal reduction in risk. Would we be better off with an anabolic or an antiresorptive drug? Of course, you know that there are several fracture endpoint trials which directly compare anabolic and antiresorptive therapy, basically looking at bisphosphonates.

The first is the Vero trial here where patients with fractures were randomized to receive teriparatide in blue or resedronate in purple. You see there's about a 50% reduction in risk of vertebral fracture and lower numbers of nonvertebral fractures to a trend level with teriparatide compared to resedronate.

We know from the ACTIVE trial, which randomized patients to a balloparatide, teriparatide or placebo, that a balliparatide is at least as good as teriparatide, if not better at reducing fracture risk. If teriparatide is better than bisphosphonate, abaliparatide certainly is too.

We also have this post hoc analysis where patients from ACTIV and the extension where after the abaliparatide or placebo patients were given alendronate in this post hoc analysis and vertebral fracture rates were compared. Of course, alendronate was effective at reducing vertebral fractures, but abaliparatide reduced them substantially more than did alendronate. And there was also a trend towards lower risk of nonvertebral fractures with a baliparatide versus alendronate.

Also from the ARCH trial we know that patients who were randomized to receive a year of romosozumab first followed by alendronate in green compared to alendronate only in pink had a reduced risk of vertebral fractures already within year one sustained and perhaps even extended over year two.

And a lower risk of nonvertebral and hip fractures in patients who began with romosozumab compared to alendronate. These are all the anabolic and bisphosphonate comparators studies. But we also asked the question about whether starting with an anabolic could be better than a treatment with just the antiresorptive that we know is the most potent currently denosumab. Here we took advantage of the FRAME and the FRAME extension extension trials to Compare a two year sequence of ramosozumab followed by denosumab from the original frame study.

We compared that to the group that received placebo in the first year followed by denosumab in the second year and another year of denosumab in the frame study extension. We cut out the placebo year. Of course, when we follow this type of design, we are looking at patients who are on average a year older in the two year denosumab trial.

And so to balance the starting characteristics we use propensity score weighting.

The data show that those patients who receive a year of romosozumab first followed by denosumab have a 55% lower risk of vertebral fracture compared to 2 years of denosumab only. And lower rates of nonvertebral and hip fractures are also seen with trend level significance. I think the data are pretty clear cut that for patients at imminent risk where the target is maximal rapid fracture risk production anabolic therapy reduces fractures more than antiresorptive therapy, including both bisphosphonates and denosumab. Anabolic treatments represent the best option for achieving this treatment target.

This is particularly important for patients with major central fractures, spine, hip, pelvis and perhaps arguable whether some patients with more minor fractures might not require this more aggressive approach. What about now the second set of patients, those patients who begin with T scores of -2.5 or below. How do we use the treatment targets to help us direct our therapy choices? We considered a few factors here.

One was the probability of reaching the T score score target in about three years. We arbitrarily chose a 50% probability and said okay, if there's more than a 50% probability that you can get to the target in three years, that drug is okay. Whereas if that probability is below 50%, maybe that's not the best option. Of course the ability to achieve the treatment targets differs for different agents.

It's based on starting BMD differs for hip and spine and it varies pretty substantially by treatment sequence.

So that if you are anticipating the largest BMD increments, you have to use the anabolic agents first. This table shows kind of a summary of the data that we looked at to draw our conclusions. This is a set of different studies.

These are not head to head, these are different trials.

So please accept that as the caveat. But what you're seeing here is the lowest baseline T score for the hip on the left, for the spine on the right. That permits at least 50% of women to achieve A T score above the minimum target here of -2.5 in three years.

For alendronate, your patient could have a total hip T score as low as - 2.7, spine T score as low as - 3, and still be likely to achieve a T score above -2.5. With denosumab, you can go down a tiny bit lower. But once you get down to a total hip T score below minus 2.8 or a spine T score below minus 3.1, you need to begin with an anabolic agent in order to have a at least a 50% probability that your patient will attain this minimum treatment target. In summary, for a treatment target above minus 2.5, to get the treatment target above minus 2.5, you can use bisphosphonates or denosumab for baseline, total hip T scores of minus 2.8 and spine T scores of minus 3.1 or above.

But for baseline T scores below those, anabolic agents are needed. But anabolic agents are also going to be needed for many patients even with these higher hip and spine T score levels. If the treatment Target is above minus 2 or if there's an urgency to achieve the treatment target faster or to ensure a higher probability of achieving that treatment target. You have a person with a spine and hip fracture and you want to make sure that you achieve these targets.

You may want to choose something that has an 80 or 90% probability of getting you there, not just 50%.

Now let's go to that third category of patients. These are patients with a baseline T score above minus 2.5 when they have their fracture. And our goal here is an increase in BMD in spine and hip.

Most agents will achieve the targets that we enunciated. The choice of anabolic vs antiresorptive here is still going to be based on the fracture site, the recency, the severity, and perhaps fracture number as well. Certainly for spine, hip and pelvic fractures, most of us would agree that regardless of the T score being above minus 2.5, an anabolic treatment would be appropriate, whereas bisphosphonates certainly would be appropriate for people with more minor fractures, especially if they're more remote. To really follow this goal directed treatment paradigm, you have to determine if treatment targets are being met periodically by doing an interval fracture history, repeating bone density measurements, of course, and repeating vertebral imaging.

Because there's no other way to be certain that a vertebral fracture has not occurred on your therapy. Perhaps if you've got really good height measurements and the height Is rock stable? You could avoid that, but if there's any height loss, a repeat vertebral image should be obtained. It's important to recognize that determining if a treatment target has been met is distinct from monitoring for a treatment response.

A treatment response can be monitored with a biochemical marker, sometimes with bone density, but a good treatment response might be still be insufficient for patients to achieve treatment targets. If a target has not been achieved, you should consider a change to a more potent therapy or at least continue the highest potency therapy sequence available. But if a target has been achieved, the focus is then on maintaining bone density, which can be done. Continuing treatment in some circumstances, pausing treatment if a bisphosphonate was last used, or changing to a bisphosphonate, perhaps zoledronic acid, for example, and administering it periodically, perhaps once every five years, as was recently shown by Boland and colleagues.

To maintain BMD long term and maintain reduced fracture risk in patients with low bone Mass in their 50s recent study published a few months ago of course there are limitations to this whole approach and the reliable BMD data is crucial and a consensus about which major fractures are associated with the highest fracture probability is required. With very low starting T scores, we might not be able to achieve the targets. Of course, it makes sense to use the therapy that could get you the closest. Again, little evidence for patients with fractures whose starting T scores are above minus 2.5.

We know that the effects of anabolics after antiresorptives are less robust. We can't assume that we're going to achieve the gains that we. I think we will in that setting. The evidence about repeat anabolic regimens is very deficient currently, and the bisphosphonate schedule to maintain BMD may vary among individuals.

But in summary, selecting treatment targets for individual patients can help ensure that the most appropriate regimen is chosen for that patient. Patients with recent fractures should be treated with anabolic agents that reduce fracture risk rapidly and maximally. Maximally, attaining a T score above minus 2.5 is the minimum BMD target. Higher targets should be considered in patients with the fracture history at least above -2.

Patients with fractures and T scores that are already above minus 2.5 should have minimum BMD gains in both spine and hip, and treatment sequence is an important consideration. Thank you very much for your attention. Thank you very much. Dr. Kausman, please come to the microphone in the middle aisle with your questions.

Please state your name and where you're coming from. Subhash Kukreja from Chicago. I Mean, you clearly showed with vertebral fracture reduction with anabolic first and followed by the antiresoptive with Roma, of course, the hip fractures are also reduced. How strong are the data showing reduction in hip fractures in anabolic first followed by antiresoptive?

Well, I think that the best data come from the Arch trial for that. We don't have enough hip fractures for the Vero trial, nor did we have enough fractures in the active and active extension trial to make any conclusions. The best trial come from the Arch study for looking at hip fractures specifically with anabolic versus antiresorptive. Right.

With the Romo, but not with the other two. I guess the concern would be because with the anabolic, the HIF BMD may take a while to increase, although there are anatomical changes.

So I guess there's a gap in terms of knowledge there, I think. Well, if you look at the hip BMD specifically and consider that the best surrogate for the protection against hip fracture, in fact, with baliparatide followed by alendronate, over three and a half years, you attain very similar BMD increments to patients that receive ramosumab followed by alendronate.

I think, in fact, the results would be pretty similar. But of course, we're talking across trials here, and we always have to make sure we recognize that caveat. I think we're just going to have time for one more question. I apologize, but you can come up after the end of our talks.

Yeah, that was an excellent review, and thank you. One question. There is a notion that people that exercise a lot, like runners, have micro fractures that heal quickly after they run. And I wanted to know what your opinion was of using antiresorptives in that population.

I don't think that the data are really strong enough. I think these things usually heal with a change in the training program, and I would prefer not to put people on drugs for that specific indication, especially young people. Thanks. Thank you.

Thank you, Dr. Kauffman. All right, our next speaker is Dr. Richard Eastl from University of Sheffield. Dr. Eastl will be speaking on imminent fracture risk, its identification by BMD, FRAX and bone turnover markers. Please welcome Dr. Eastlake.

Thank you, Dr. Crook. And good morning, ladies and gentlemen.

Thanks so much to the steering committee for inviting me to speak to you today and to take part in this exciting symposium.

So my topic is imminent fracture risk, and this is a really interesting topic where we've got lots of information which we've gathered in the last few years, which I'd like to tell you about, but also talk to you a bit about what the likely mechanism is for this and what are the clinical consequences when we want to manage patients.

This one, there we go.

Right, so what is it? What is imminent fracture risk?

So we've known for many years that if you have one fracture, a prior fracture, this is an important risk factor for further fractures.

But the risk of that second fracture is particularly high in the two years following the first fracture.

And so we refer to the first fracture as the index fracture or the sentinel fracture. And the risk we just heard of the fracture in those two years on average is about 12%. And this has been well shown by a recent meta analysis, this one by Wong, which summarized 18 studies.

And I'll show you that in a moment. And about half of the refractures are occurring in these first two years, and then the other half would be later.

And so we talk about high imminent risk of fracturing in the two years after the index fracture. This is the key definition, imminent fracture risk.

And this is the forest plot from that meta analysis from Wong, just showing how, if we look on the right here, we can see the overall estimate of about 12% over the next two years from this large number of trials. And I'd like to point out to you that many of these trials were done or one of these observational studies were done in the last 10 years.

So we've accumulated a lot of information and you can see that all the points just about are to the right of the line of zero.

And so all the studies are showing the same thing, that there's a high risk of fracturing following a fracture.

So what I'd like to consider in my time here is how quickly does the fracture risk increase after the initial fracture?

Are some index fractures more likely to predict further fracture? I'm going to speak about why there is an increase in fracture risk. And this is an area which has been very little studied compared to the epidemiology.

And is there a period of high bone turnover, rapid bone loss? Would these explain why fracture risk is so high? Is it true that after a fall there's a high imminent risk of falling? Could that explain it?

And I'll talk a bit about the biomechanical consequences having a vertebral fracture. Then I'll talk about the diagnostic tests, the so called BMD and FRAX and bone turnover markers, whether these are valuable in evaluating your patients, and finish up by saying, how would we actually manage imminent fracture risk in the clinical setting? And do we have guidance for this? What are the characteristics of imminent fractures.

There've been many studies, as I mentioned, this is one of the studies that's from Iceland. They took the Iceland population and they were focusing on this group of fractures referred to as major osteoporotic fractures, which includes hip, spine, forearm and humerus. What you can see is a time course after the person has their first fracture. What's the risk of having a further fracture?

You can see in just these first few months, it's really high. This is the background rate of fracture as shown by the broken line. But in these people who had fractures, it's really high and it's particularly high in the first few months and remains pretty high for two years. And of course it remains a bit high for out to 10 years.

But this is imminent fracture risk in this period here. That's our focus today. And say it's very high and it's higher still in women and older people.

Now the next question is which of the fractures are particularly predictive?

And so in the same cohort of Icelandic people, they looked at these four different components of the mof and what they found was that the one that was the real predictor, the best predictor was a spine fracture.

So it probably won't surprise you, but it really did come out top. Then the next one, humerus and he femur and then the forearm, not quite so predictive. There is this important hierarchy of prediction.

This is the slide that you just saw from Dr. Cosman, which makes the same point that this is in a US population of Medicare beneficiaries. A large number of people just showing that spine fracture, pelvic fracture, hip fracture. These are the big ones that predict further fracture. And ankle, not so much.

You might notice I've missed out clavicle. And it's just that clavicle. Although it's a high risk, there aren't so many people getting clavicular fractures in the older age range. My main point here is that the risk of fracture is very high in the first few months after the index fracture.

And it's particularly high at the spine, pelvis and hip.

So why I've given you the evidence. The evidence is so strong about imminent fractures, but this is all epidemiological studies and we're endocrinologists. We want to know why things happen.

And there's so little written about this. I had to really work on this. We spent the last nine months worrying about what the likely mechanisms are. Whenever we think about high fracture risk, we think, especially in the older person, we think about Rapid bone loss, we think about high bone turnover.

What's the evidence that this happens after a fracture? I'm going to go through the evidence for that. I've spent quite a bit of time looking at what happens to bone turnover markers after you have a fracture. We recruited 20 women who'd had a distal forearm fracture.

We recruited them the day they fractured and followed them regularly over the following year. And you can see that if you look at the bone formation marker P1MP on the left here, by about six weeks, it peaks. And probably it's peaking early because there's a lot of callus formation and callus contains collagen. Over here, we've got a bone resorption marker which does peak, but more like 12 weeks, probably the remodeling of the callus.

But in addition to the changes due to callus formation, there's also the issue about is there local bone loss, is there whole body bone loss? And this is an important question.

So we looked at that by measuring the bone density around the forearm.

So in these same women, we measured the carpus, the bones of the wrist, and in the group on the side where the fracture occurred, even within six weeks, there was a 20% reduction on average.

And you can see there are some people who lost even more than that.

So this is. We don't normally see such massive bone loss.

And so this is a very special situation.

And this bone loss was described many years ago by Harold Frost, and he called it the rapid acceleratory phenomenon. And these people who are having high bone loss, six of them people, had algae dystrophy with sudex atrophy.

So it's clinically important as well.

So that definitely happens.

But if you go to the 1/3 forearm, nothing's happening.

So it's a very localized bone loss. And just to check that it's localized, this is just showing you the bones of the carpal area which get so osteoporotic. The wrap.

And so we looked at a group of women who'd had forearm fractures and followed them for four years just to see whether they had rapid bone loss. And the opposite was true. The women who'd had a forearm fracture had almost no bone loss from the spine, whereas those who had no fear forearm fracture had bone loss because they're older women.

So it does seem that generalized bone loss doesn't happen after a forearm fracture.

Just to check it, we went to a group of women with ankle fracture and recruited them. And you get an even bigger increase in P1 MP because you get more callous formation.

So you get a very big increase here in P1MP and a smaller increase in the bone resorption marker. And when we looked at the bone loss, again just distal to the fracture, huge bone loss in the first six weeks, which wasn't found in the side that didn't fracture.

And when we were looked at more proximal at the femoral neck, no bone loss.

So it seems to be that the reasons for increased bone markers after a fracture are healing of the callus and the regional local bone loss.

So that's kind of how I concluded we did look at another fracture, which was the tibial shaft fracture, which is probably just about the biggest bone we can fracture.

And so now the changes in the bone, 10 of the markers, are enormous.

After a tibial shaft fracture, this is a fracture that occurs in younger people, usually men. And in the UK there will be people playing soccer.

And so this is the bone marker change. And these people do lose bone from their hip.

And this is because there's some immobilization.

So when we have a fracture and we immobilize, then we can see some bone loss.

So what about hip fracture? This is one of the most important fractures.

So there's one or two papers published on measuring the rate of bone loss on the other side, the non fractured side, the hip after hip fracture. And this is a study from New York just showing accelerated bone loss after the hip fracture in the first year and particularly high in the first couple of months, probably because of the immobilization that patients with hip fracture have. But whenever you see high bone loss like this, you wonder, is the high bone loss a consequence of the fracture or is it the cause of the fracture?

And so that's an important question.

And it was a question that was thought about by an epidemiologist in the UK about 50 years ago and Peto and he was looking at a different medical problem, but it's true of all medical problems, is that when you see rapid change in something like bone density here after the event of fracture, it might have been present beforehand. And he called this effect the horse racing. And the horse racing effect is here we have got a photograph of a horsing race and the one that's ahead, the blue guy, he's ahead and he got ahead because his horse was running faster. And he's probably going to be the guy who gets to the finish line first.

And so he called it horse racing effect to make us think we need to think of chicken and egg. When we see, when we're making an observation.

So it seems that for hip fracture there may well be rapid bone loss.

So what's the evidence for that?

Well, there have been epidemiological studies following populations, looking at rates of bone loss and seeing whether rate of bone loss predicts fracture. And this study here from Australia, Nguyen et al, this showed that the people with the most rapid hip bone loss were the ones with the most likely to get hip fracture.

So it fits in with this horse racing effect that the reason why people have high bone loss after a hip fracture is because they had it before. And the bone turnover markers would also be expected to be high before somebody has a hip fracture.

And this is some data now on a recent meta analysis just earlier this year, just showing that if you take hip fracture patients that the high CTX predicts having a hip fracture.

So I think that people go on to have a hip fracture, a high bone turnover, higher bone loss, and they go on to have a hip fracture and they continue to lose bone at a more rapid rate and therefore are more at risk of further fractures. The last bit of evidence to give you is from the study of osteoporotic fractures where they were measuring bone density over many years and they pulled out the data from a four year period around a fracture to see whether or not bone loss was accelerated. And they found out that for a hip fracture there was accelerated bone loss, just like we've seen.

And also for vertebral fracture there was accelerated bone loss, but there wasn't for ankle and forearm.

So it was also confirming this whole concept that perhaps for hip and vertebral fractures, but not for other fractures, that there is greater bone loss after the fracture and probably this was there before the fracture and that goes along with high bone turnover. That was my first thought as to why fractures are common after a fracture. My second thought was maybe if you have a fall, you're more likely to have another fall in the next few months.

We do know that if you have one fall in the future, you're likely to have another fall. But we haven't actually done the study yet in that I've found of whether a recent fall predicts an imminent fall. We do know that if a recent fall predicts an imminent fracture, and I'll show you that data in just a moment. And we also know that if you have a stroke that you only have a temporary increase in risk.

And this is the study that shows if you ask about a recent fall, you can predict whether somebody's going to have an imminent Fracture. And this is just showing, this is true for women on the left here, sort of osteoporotic fractures. And true in men. Those who had the recent fall are the ones who go on to have another fracture in the next year or two.

That was confirming this concept. But we still don't know whether a recent fall predicts an imminent fall. Then the last thing is the biomechanical effects of a fracture.

We've known for a long time about the vertebral fracture cascade.

And Dr. Cosman mentioned this, the paper from Lindsay showed that if you have an incident fracture, you're really likely to have another incident fracture. Really, really likely. And the biomechanics people have got their hands on this idea.

And so here they are modeling.

We're using finite element modeling, a fracture of T12, a mild fracture and a more severe fracture. If we focus on the more severe fracture in panel C, we can look over here what happens with the finite element modeling and the stress that happens throughout the spine after a T12 fracture. The red is a lot of stress and the blue is a whole lot of stress. And you can see the very worst Blue is in T10.

So it predicts that an adjacent vertebra will fracture when you fracture one nearby. This fits in with our clinical experience that when you have a vertebral fracture, it's not just any old vertebral fracture that happens second, it's a fracture nearby, the so called fracture cascade.

So what about clinically, what do we do? How do we evaluate our patients?

It's typical when we evaluate our patients to use frax. FRAX is a worldwide tool that's used. It just happens to have come out of my university, but it's used worldwide and it gives you a 10 year risk of fracturing. This has been looked at, but it doesn't take into account very well if there's a recent fracture.

So FRAX has failed in providing the increase in the fracture risk in the next couple of years when you try and apply it to these patients.

So what the FRAX group did was they said, well, let's put in multipliers.

If somebody has a recent fracture, let's put in a multiplier.

So these are the multipliers to what you need to multiply the risk by.

And you can see that for vertebral fracture, these are really big modifiers and for hip fracture, but they're not so big for forearm fracture. Just fitting in with what we said earlier on, this modifier has been put into the frax tool. And we now have a frax tool called Frax Plus. And the Frax plus, it does a number of things that we've all been asking for for years, like putting in falls and diabetes and so on, but it also puts in recent fracture.

And what they mean by a recent fracture is a fracture. In the last two years of the spine, hip, forearm and humerus, I've talked about bone turnover markers, and I'm sure I've convinced you that bone markers wouldn't be at all helpful because most of the change in bone markers relates to fracture healing.

So we're not going to have that as a test, but we are going to have bone mineral density.

So bone mineral density in this Canadian population, the Kamos study, this is looking at women who had a recent.

Older women who've had a recent fracture, asking the question, what predicts further fracture? And the one that came over really strongly was bone mineral density. If the bone mineral density here at the total hip is less than minus 2.5 or less, that's a big risk factor for further fractures.

So if you're trying to work out whether your patient had a recent fracture is at high risk of further fracture, the BMD is a good tool.

There are a few other predictors as well here. What about the treatments that we use in people with recent fractures? What are the ones that we should be thinking about? What we need to know is, if somebody has a recent fracture, do the drugs work?

There have been one or two trials that allow us to know whether that's true or not.

So let me just go through with you the trials that recruited patients based on having a recent fracture.

So this is the trial of Lyles where the criterion was that they've had a hip fracture in the last 90 days. That's ideal for what we want.

They got over 2,000 people. It's a heroic study. By infusing the zoledronate or zoledronic acid, if you prefer, they showed a clear effect on clinical fractures.

So it does work.

If you take people who do have a hip fracture and you give them a drug like zoledronate, it works.

So that's very helpful to know. I was involved in the trial of Residronate where the only entry criteria was having two vertebral fractures. The BMD was not a requirement.

So it's just two vertebral fractures. Of course, we don't know if they're recent or not, because you can never know very well whether her fracture is recent. But certainly the end criteria was vertebral fracture.

So if somebody just has a vertebral fracture, residronate reduces your risk of vertebral fracture.

So you can see here, this is just showing what happened in the placebo group and the residuinate 5 milligram group, just showing it reduces the risk of fracturing.

So finding people on the basis of fracture is really important. And I find this really helpful clinically because I'm often discussing cases with my colleagues and we have a patient with vertebral fracture, should they get a drug or not? And they'll say to me, well, surely we need to know the bmd.

You don't really, for hip and spine fractures, you can treat not knowing the bmd. The other trial which looks at recent vertebral fractures, we heard from Dr. Cosman about the Vero trial, which was a comparison of residronate against teriparatide. And in this trial, they had a subgroup analysis where they looked to see what the efficacy of the drugs were in people who had a recent clinical vertebral fracture. And when they did this, they reported that in people who either did or didn't have a recent clinical vertebral fracture, that the benefit was pretty much the same.

And so therefore, that shows that if you have a recent fracture, turiperidide still works in comparison to residual rate.

So pretty good evidence. Then you can treat on the basis of fracture when it comes to hip fracture and vertebral fracture.

Now the next thing we need to do is try and think about which drug to use.

And so already Dr. Cosman has covered this and we'll be hearing more about other drugs later. I got involved in the trial that's called the SABR study, where we pulled together all of the osteoporosis clinical trials we possibly could, and with all the data on the fracture data, all the data on bmd, so we could standardize the information.

And so when we did this, each bubble here on this plot represents a clinical trial. This is looking at our 12 month data that Dr. Velasa published.

And so each bubble is a clinical trial. And I've highlighted for denozumab, ramosozumab, baliparatides, ledronate and turipiratide. We got really big increases in total hip BMD and really big decreases in all clinical fractures.

So these are the kind of potent drugs you might think about using in people at high risk of further fracture.

And then you heard from Dr. Kosman the her approach, her recommended approach for goal directed therapy. And in that paper we put this algorithm and the algorithm for imminent fractures is here. And we identified the vertebral pelvis and hip fractures as ones where we really should be thinking about osteoanabolic first.

So that just underlines what she was saying about the best way of treating and using these drugs.

So the very last thing just to mention to you is that there's been a lot of interest worldwide in the whole idea of fracture liaison services.

So fracture liaison services, when you have a medical person in place, like a nurse who goes to the fracture clinic, finds people over the age of 50 and makes sure they get good fracture risk evaluation and appropriate treatment for and when people have introduced this, and of course most people in most countries, including the US don't get treatment after a fracture. But with these fls, then meta analysis has shown you get more likely to initiate treatment, the patients are more likely to adhere to the treatment and the fracture risks go down by about 74% in the first year.

So in conclusion, I've tried to make the point.

The imminent fractures particularly common after vertebral hip and pelvic fractures, they occur within two years of the index fracture. I don't think we've really worked out the mechanism for this two year period of bone loss of fracture risk, but it could be for some fractures it could be accelerated bone loss. I've tried to point out that we can in our patients work out fracture is using FRAX plus or by bmd and the drugs that we have, some pretty potent ones, and these are the ones that you might want to use in this setting. And the algorithms like when I showed you from the goal directed therapy guidelines that Dr. Cosman showed, we should implement these guidelines by having a local fracture liaison service.

So that's my practical recommendations. I just wanted to say thank you to two people who helped me putting this talk together. I didn't know so much about imminent fractures before I started preparing this talk and I got lots of good advice from Dr. Cummings here and lot of help from Dr. Villasa as well.

So thank you to those two and thank you to you for your attention.

Thank you so much, Dr. Eastl, thank you for coming for questions. Geneva, SWITZERLAND hi Richard. Excellent talk. I was wondering how much of this exponential decline in relative risk of the second fracture after the index one could be a statistical issue Just because fractures increase mortality, the more susceptible, the more frail die early.

And so with time we end up with the attrition of the susceptibles. Have you considered that? Yeah.

So your Point is really well taken.

Some of the papers that I was citing there do take into account the competing effects of mortality. But you're absolutely right. That could be of confounder. Thank you.

Any other questions? I have a question about bone turnover markers. Oh, yeah. The reference range varies very much by country.

And how would you suggest that? How should we adjust our practice in a country where we have a pretty variable population? Yeah.

So there are some differences by nation and there are some differences by race I agree with.

But mostly it's because people haven't taken the trouble to do careful reference intervals.

So as part of an IOF working group, we published information on what are the reference ranges for the different bone markers. And remarkably, they're very similar.

And so, for example, so to me, the really big deal about a bone marker is identifying the average value for a healthy young woman.

To me, that's a target for therapy, one of my targets. And that's like 35 for P1MP, it's 35 for CTX. It's like 250.

So we've really got strong evidence for reference intervals for those.

So I think it's just that people don't take enough trouble because to do a reference range, you really need to have healthy people. You really need to have about 200 of them, and people don't have the time to do those kind of things.

So the best thing to do, I think, is just to adopt a reference range like the one the IOF recommend. Thank you.

Galina Smushkin from Victoria, British Columbia, Canada. Thank you for the talk. Could you comment on the timing of initiation of therapy post index fracture? What is the best time?

Is it as soon as possible? If it's anabolic therapy, should we wait like six weeks? If it's antiresorptive therapy, yeah. Your question's a good one, and it's not so well studied.

I think my answer to what we do is as soon as possible. Of course, after a vertebral fracture, it's usually been a few weeks anyway because things take time to get to you. But for a hip fracture, you could treat on the day they fracture if you wanted to. But in the trial, it was recommended you wait at least two weeks or so just to allow some fracture healing.

But fracture healing takes like six months or a year.

So it's always struck me as a pretty dark thing to do, really. But, yeah, usually wait a couple of weeks after a hip fracture and get in with whatever drug you're giving. Thank you.

Phillips, Emory. What do you do in the patient that has had bilateral hip replacement, many of our older patients don't have any hip to measure and they're arthritic in their spine, so there's a false positive. Tell us what you do.

Yeah, so it depends what question I'm trying to answer.

So if I want to know their fracture risk, I will do a forearm BMD because that's all I've really got access to. If I want to know whether they're responding to treatment, I'll do a bone turnover marker.

So those are two tools I would use in the setting you describe. Hello, Cheyenne from Connecticut.

Can you speak to the use of baseline bone turnover markers like CTX in deciding initial therapy? For example, a patient who you see who already has a CTX at goal at 150, 200, does that influence your decision to use a bisphosphonate or not? Yeah.

So this is a really important question, and we don't have strong enough evidence to use bone turnover markers for deciding therapy.

It turns out that when people have analyzed the relationship with baseline bone turnover and fracture benefit, or BMD benefit, the higher the turnover, the better the response, whether it's antiresorptive or anabolic. It's ironic, it's a paradox, and I don't fully understand why it happens, but that's what it is.

So I don't usually recommend bone markers for choosing the therapy. Thank you very much, Dr. Eastel.

To conclude our session, we welcome our final speaker, Dr. Gina woods from University of California, San Diego. Dr. Woods will present on the modern armamentarium of Osteoporosis therapies selection and sequence. Thank you very much to the organizing committee for inviting me to speak. Although I have to say that going third in a 90 minute session after Drs.

Kauzman and Eastl feels a little bit like being the opening act for Beyonce, but finding out you're on after her. I didn't select the title of this talk. It was assigned to me, but I actually really like it. And from the title, I've selected the following three learning objectives for this next 30 minutes.

What is in the modern armamentarium? What tools do we have available to combat osteoporosis in 2025? How do we select treatment based on fracture risk, but also based on real world considerations? Osteoporosis treatment is unlike other chronic diseases because the sequence in which we use the available drugs really affects their efficacy.

So the treatment can be a little more complex.

So starting with reviewing what tools we have in our toolbox, I promise I made these slides over a month ago and it has nothing to do with the recent headline news and most of what I'm going to talk about is medications. But I did want to just start by saying that nutrition and exercise are really the foundation for good bone health across the lifespan. I don't want to overlook the large body of research that's happening in the exercise and nutrition science field.

I think that we could benefit from more collaboration with that community both at scientific meetings like this one and in our day to day clinical practice. I happen to have learned a few pearls along the way from some of those folks. I just wanted to share one slide on nutrition and bone health. I work down the road from Connie Weaver at SDSU and she's taught me a few things like to talk to patients about eating patterns rather than individual nutrients.

For example, even some eating patterns that have health benefits, like a vegan eating pattern, they also have vulnerabilities. In fact, a vegan eating pattern is associated with a higher risk for hip fracture. Patients following that eating pattern should at least be aware of that so that they can get earlier screening and pay particular attention to their calcium and protein intake.

I've also learned about the importance of the food matrix in addition to the individual nutrients.

For example, patients who are able to consume dairy, we'll get calcium and protein together in a beneficial food matrix that influences the absorption and digestibility of those nutrients. When it comes to protein and bone health, we don't know exactly how much protein is needed for optimal bone health, but we do have good information on muscle health. With aging, of course, we're also losing muscle. As we age, our muscle becomes resistant to the anabolic effects of protein intake and so we need to eat more just to maintain our muscle mass.

For older adults who want to maintain their muscle mass, I give them a target of 1 to 1.2 grams of protein per kg body weight per day, presuming that they have normal kidney function. Finally, for the patient who wants to do everything and more for their bone health, I tell them about the two randomized trials that showed that eating 50 grams a day of prunes can mitigate bone loss, doesn't increase bone density, but it can prevent bone loss in postmenopausal women. When it comes to exercise and bone health, I would encourage us to go beyond just simply saying weight bearing exercise that's not really specific enough to be actionable. From Robin Daily, I've learned that when giving an exercise prescription for bone health, it should include three components.

Progressive resistance training, like weights or bands, progressive Impact exercises like jumping or plyometrics and progressive balance training, and that these should all be done at least twice a week. We have a high level of evidence that exercise increases muscle strength, it improves posture balance and reduces the risk of falls. And our medications don't have any of these benefits. What is the mechanism by which exercise improves bone density?

It's actually thought to be the same pathways as some of our medications are working when we load the skeleton with weight that is sensed by the mechanosensitive osteocyte, leading to a reduction in sclerostin and an increase in WNT signaling, same pathway that romozosumab is acting on. You may be familiar with the Liftmore trial, which was a randomized controlled trial conducted by Dr. Belinda Beck in Australia in which she took postmenopausal women who were not previously exercising and randomized them to either a high intensity resistance and impact training group called Hirit or a control low intensity exercise program. Both groups exercised 30 minutes twice a week for eight months. And the high rate group saw significant increases in BMD at the spine and maintenance at the hip, while the control group lost bone at both sites.

And unsurprisingly, the HIRIT group experienced greater gains in every single measure of strength and physical function compared to the control group. Dr. Beck took this work one step further and developed a deliverable called oneiro. This is an exercise program based on the Liftmore trial. It is available to trained and licensed providers, of which there are an increasing number across the US and in Australia.

I'm not sure about other countries, but I've met a number of these certified providers and they are very interested in connecting with us, not just for referrals, but to actually collaborate with us in the care of these patients. And I'm very fortunate to collaborate with Deb Serbin, who is an ONEIRO licensed provider in my area. I refer many of my patients to her.

And so they are participating in this supervised exercise program.

They're improving their bone health, they're strengthening their muscles, and in addition they're feeling a sense of agency and they're developing a community of peer support, adding additional benefits to the program. One thing that is not in the armamentarium is osteostrong. This is an exercise program that is franchised and advertises that it can increase your bone density. It's just a once a week program.

Although Osteo Strong has attempted to publish some abstracts and papers, all of the top exercise scientists have found significant methodologic flaws with their work. If your Patients are asking you about Osteostrong. I would encourage you to check out Dr. Laura John Gregorio's YouTube channel called Bones Lab, where she has some really nice videos that explain what the data really says about this program.

Okay, moving on to the pharmacologic armamentarium.

In 2025, we have five classes of FDA approved medications for the treatment of postmenopausal osteoporosis. And when we're categorizing our patients with osteoporosis, we're putting them into either the category of high risk or very high risk for fracture. And as we've heard, when we're at very high risk, we're going to recommend an upfront anabolic agent. But before we delve further into treatment, I just want to highlight that we also have three FDA approved classes of medication available for prevention of osteoporosis, and these are vastly underutilized.

Osteoporosis is preventable, and although as endocrinologists we're typically not seeing patients until disease is established, we should be strongly advocating for the use of these preventive therapies so that fewer patients will end up in that very high risk. Bucket it so how do we select treatment among all of the available options? I'm sure you're all familiar with the different medications that are available, but comparing the antiresorptives, when we're selecting a treatment, we are considering fracture risk, but we're also considering other factors like potential side effects, contraindications and patient preferences. It is great that we have oral, IV and subcutaneous formulations available.

And when used under appropriate medical supervision, these medications are extremely safe, with the notable exception that denosumab carries a boxed warning for severe hypocalcemia in advanced chronic kidney disease. And looking at the cost, these medications all come in generic or biosimilar versions, and they're very inexpensive, particularly the bisphosphonates, making them readily accessible for most patients. When selecting between the antiresorptives, denosumab is going to provide the greatest potential bone density increase, although of course, if and when you stop denosumab, you're going to need to follow it up timely with a bisphosphonate. And even if you do, you still may not be able to maintain all of the gains that you have achieved on treatment.

Soledronate offers the convenience of infrequent dosing, typically given once a year, although one dose may maintain bone density for up to five years, as we just heard, and raloxifene, we don't talk too much about but it's a nice option to have as an alternative for patients who don't want to or can't take bisphosphonates or denosumab. It is not associated with atypical femur fractures or onj, but it is less potent and did not reduce hip fracture risk when comparing between the anabolic agents and I should mention that romazosumab is a dual acting agent. It has anabolic and antiresorptive properties, so perhaps it should have a category all to itself. But when comparing these agents they all come as injections, typically for a limited duration of time.

The PTH analogs have an excellent safety profile. Romazosumab is the newest tool in the toolbox. It's been on the market for six years and it does carry a boxed warning for cardiovascular risk. And looking at the cost of these medications, it is significantly higher on the order of 35 to $40,000 per year.

Even though there is a generic teriparatide available, the cost hasn't come down.

So when selecting between anabolic agents we do have some comparative efficacy data showing that abaloparatide is superior to teriparatide at increasing hip BMD and achieving greater reduction in major osteoporotic fractures. But we don't have any head to head trials comparing PTH agonists to romozosumab as a first line therapy.

So when we're selecting an initial treatment for our patient with postmenopausal osteoporosis, it really boils down to whether we think she's at high versus very high fracture risk.

And there is no universally agreed upon clear definition for very high risk. We have a number of different clinical practice guidelines that are all slightly different. Since we're at the ENDO meeting, I'll highlight that the ENDO Society guidelines define very high fracture risk risk as severe or multiple vertebral fractures or a T score of negative 2.5 or lower and fractures. For those at very high risk, we are recommending upfront anabolic therapy.

The more broadly we define very high risk that will result in a greater number of patients being recommended for upfront anabolic therapy, which as we just saw carries a significant cost to the health care system. I'd like to pose a question, although I don't claim to have the answer to it. If you do, please let me know. But that is how do or perhaps how should value based care principles shape these osteoporosis treatment guidelines?

So to summarize treatment selection we're going to consider a number of factors the treatment target, as Dr. Kossman taught us. We're going to assess imminent fracture risk, as Dr. Eastl discussed, and we'll be stratifying our patients as high versus very high risk. But we're also going to consider some real world factors such as patient preferences, contraindications and side effects. I put a picture of a woman wearing pajamas here because at UCSD Health, where I practice, there's increased attention being paid to physician wellness because they recognize that burnout is a significant threat to the workforce.

Those of us on the front lines know that the more we prescribe expensive therapies, the more we encounter prior authorization requests, denials, appeals, peer to peers. This largely unreimbursed administrative work adds significantly to our pajama time and underscores the need for value based care principles that will support both our patients and our workforce.

Now that we've discussed treatment selection, we'll move on to treatment sequence. As I said before, this is a little bit complex because the order in which we use these medications does influence their effectiveness.

We're going to walk through three scenarios, starting with a common one patient referred to endocrinology for osteoporosis who's been on an oral bisphosphonate and either can't tolerate the treatment or say, has completed five years of alendronate but is still at high fracture risk.

So what do we do next? Do we transition to a different antiresorptive like zoledronate or denosumab? Or do we pivot to an anabolic and give them a PTH agonist or romozosum?

First, let's discuss transitioning from one antiresorptive to another. In this randomized trial, the Investigators took about 600 women who had been on oral bisphosphonates for an average about six years and still had T scores at or below negative 2.5. And they randomized them to one year of either denosumab or zoledronic acid, and the outcome was change in bone density. As you can see, both groups saw significant increases in BMD at the lumbar spine and total head, but only the denosumab group had significant gains at the femoral neck and 1/3 radius.

In addition, the denosumab group had superior gains at every site measured, and there were three atypical femur fractures in this study, two in the denosumab group and one in the zoledronate group.

Next, let's look at transitioning from an oral bisphosphonate to an anabolic the STRUCTURE study was a randomized active control trial in which women who were tested on oral bisphosphonates were transitioned to either romozosumab or teriparatide, and the primary outcome was change in total hip bmd. As you can see, the romozozumab group experienced significant gains in BMD at the total hip, where the teriparatide group lost bone at both 6 and 12 months. At the lumbar spine, both groups saw increases in bmd, although the romozosumab group had significantly greater improvement than the teriparatide group.

So why do we think Romo beat teriparatide in this trial? The theory is that romozosumab is able to build bone on quiescent surfaces of bone modeling that are available after treatment with an oral bisphosphonate, whereas teriparatide relies on those surfaces of bone remodeling which are suppressed after the bisphosphonate use. In this retrospective case control study, the investigators compared women who had been on oral bisphosphonates and then were transitioned to either romozosumab, teriparatide or denosumab. At the lumbar spine, all three groups saw significant increases in bmd, although Romo had significantly greater gains than either of the other two agents.

At the total hip, both ROMO and DMAB experienced significant increases, but teriparatide did not, and at the femoral neck, only the Romo group had significant improvement in their bmd.

So if I had to summarize scenario one, we have several treatment options following oral bisphosphonates. If I had to rank them, I would say Romo comes out on top with significant gains at both the spine and the hip. Denosumab is associated with moderate spine and hip gains but not quite as great as Romo Zoledronate, modest spine and total hip gains wasn't quite as good as denosumab, and teriparatide was associated with moderate spine gains but transient hip losses.

Moving to our next scenario, this is a patient who is treatment naive and is at very high fracture risk and we treat them with an upfront PTH analog and then they return after having completed, say, two years of evaloparatide. We need to figure out what to do next.

So do we put them on an antiresorptive like a bisphosphonate denosumab or raloxifene, or is there evidence to support sequential anabolic therapy with romosozumab. It is well established that the sequence going from anabolic to antiresorptive therapy is highly effective.

We've seen this over and over. The anabolic agents work best in treatment naive individuals. And we've seen that following the anabolic with an anti resorptive is able to to consolidate the gains and offer further fracture protection.

So we saw this in the active extend trial with a baloparatide followed by alendronate and in the data switch study with the transition from teriparatide to denosumab in red as opposed to the opposite sequence.

When we started with denosumab and then transitioned to teriparatide, that transition was associated with bone loss. But what about the data for sequential anabolic therapy? The data is limited, but this is a small retrospective cohort study that does offer some insight.

So the investigators looked at two groups.

One was women who transitioned from teriparatide to romozosumab. That's the T to R group in blue. And compared them with women who transitioned from Romo to teriparatide. The R2T group in red.

As you can see at the lumbar spine and total hip, the T to R group saw significant increases in bmd. But the R to T group lost bone at the hip and saw no further increases at the spine. These data make sense when we think about the fact that Romo is a dual acting agent with both anabolic and antiresorptive properties. And toward the end of the year it looks more like an antiresorptive.

This, this looks very similar to what we saw with going from an oral bisphosphonate to a PTH analog.

So to summarize scenario number two, when we're selecting treatment after a PTH agonist, we have a lot of good options.

So bisphosphonates are associated with continued gains at the spine and total hip denosumab risk increases in the spine and total hip seen in data switch. I didn't show you these data, but there was a study done by Dr. Eastl and colleagues in which they gave a year of teriparatide followed by a year of raloxifene.

And they saw that raloxifene was able to further increase the hip BMD and maintain BMD at the spine.

So for those patients who don't want to or can't take a bisphosphonate or denosumab, it's nice to have another option then. Very limited data, but what we have available looks promising. That we could achieve continued gains at the spine and hip with transitioning from a PTH agonist to romasosumab.

Now to our third and final scenario, and this is a tough one, and it's one I have encountered. This is a patient that you're treating with long term denosumab. Say this is a patient at advanced age who your plan is indefinite. Denosumab, they're at very high risk, and even though they're coming in on time every six months and you've ruled out all the secondary causes, they just keep breaking bones.

So this is a tough situation.

So we saw that the transition from denosumab. Well, actually, I didn't show you, but we know that the transition from denosumab to bisphosphonates is at best going to maintain bone or mitigate loss of bone. We're not going to expect any further increases with that transition.

We saw that transitioning from denosumab to a PTH agonist is associated with transient hip loss, so this doesn't seem like a good option. And similarly, sequential use of long term denosumab followed by romosozumab has been shown to result in inadequate suppression of bone resorption. And there are anecdotal reports of multiple vertebral fractures with this transition.

So in these difficult cases, we're looking at combination or overlapping therapy as a potential option.

In the data study, we saw that the combination of teriparidin and teriparatide and denosumab improved BMD more than either agent alone. But it is important to note that in this study, both of those agents were started concurrently at the beginning of the study.

So as a result, we don't know whether adding teriparatide to ongoing long term denosumab therapy would yield the same benefits. But in this difficult situation, it seems like a reasonable option.

What about transitioning from romazosumab to denosumab? This is a small prospective study in which the investigators explored whether overlapping those two agents would help to control the rebound increase in bone resorption that follows denosumab discontinuation. The study included 10 women with fractures on denosumab who began Romo six months after their last DMAB dose. That's the sequential group on the left.

And eight women who began Romo three months after their last DMAB dose. That's the overlapping group on the right. The primary endpoint was change in CTX over six months following Romo initiation. As you can see, the CTX levels rose in both groups, but the increase occurred earlier in the sequential group.

During the six months, nine out of the 10 women in the sequential group had CTX levels above the premenopausal reference range, compared to only two out of eight in the overlapping group where you see the asterisks that indicates 5 milligrams of zoledronic acid was administered and that was able to bring the CTX back toward baseline. Importantly, two women in the sequential group experienced major fractures within the first three months after switching to romazosumab.

So these findings suggest that overlapping romozosumab with denosumab may dampen the rebound in bone turnover, though more robust data are needed. And finally, this was a six month prospective observational study in postmenopausal women with severe osteoporosis comparing different treatment strategies.

But I'd like to focus on the group shown in green and these are women in whom romazosumab was added to ongoing denosumab after failure of denosumab monotherapy. In this combination group we saw significant increases in spine BMD over six months, although no improvement was seen at the hip, but also no loss was seen at the hip.

So this study was small and non randomized and has inherent limitations. But these results suggest that adding ROMO to ongoing DMAB may provide benefit in these select high risk patients who are not responding to DMAB monotherapy.

So to summarize scenario number three, which is a tough one, we don't really know the optimal treatment strategy for patients failing denosumab monotherapy, but potential strategies could include combination or overlapping therapy with denosumab and an anabolic agent, either a PTH analog or Romo.

So to conclude, we now have a growing toolkit of both non pharmacologic and pharmacologic strategies to both prevent and treat postmenopausal osteoporosis. The treatment should be guided by fracture risk while also acknowledging real world considerations such as patient preferences, likelihood for adherence, cost and access. Osteoporosis treatment does require advanced planning.

Most of the therapies are time limited and the sequence in which we use them really does matter.

So optimizing both selection and sequence is the key to delivering personalized, effective care for our patients. Thank you very. Much.

Any questions, please come up to the microphone. Hi, it's Obi Harris from New York. I'm wondering if you've had any success getting insurance coverage for combined denosumab with an anabolic agent. I have had a few cases where I'VE had denosumab and teriparatide covered.

I'm not sure the insurance realized because they're sort of going through different parts. I was able to get that covered. Everyone, please be quiet as you're exiting so we can continue to discuss up here. Thank you.

I'm one of the second year endocrine fellows at Temple. I had a couple questions regarding a specific patient population. Patients with a history of spinal cord injury.

You know, those patients lose a lot of bone very fast.

My first question is, in patients who let's say they just had a spinal cord injury, is there any evidence to almost prophylactically treat them with bisphosphonates before, you know their bone density is going to go down? And the second thing is, if a patient, you know, does have very severe osteoporosis and they're following up with you in clinic, other than just offering bisphosphonate therapy, are there other therapies that we could offer?

I know there's some, some talk about vibration therapy with muscles and everything like that, but just asking what your experience has been your first question. I haven't reviewed the literature very recently, but from what I recall, with partial spinal cord injuries, you can prevent the bone loss with giving zoledronate at the time of the injury.

But if it's a complete spinal cord injury, I think zole was not very effective at preventing the bone loss. There are some studies of Romo going on in spinal cord injury patients, although I don't know what the results of that are. Then to your second question. Yes, we get a lot of questions about all sorts of different therapies.

Vibration plates, I don't recommend. Most of the vibration gets dissipated in the feet, and I just don't think it's likely to yield significant benefit on fracture risk. Hi, my name is Sora Kaisey. I'm from University of Pittsburgh.

I just have a question about overlap or combination treatment with the duration of of treatment of Prolia affected the decision whether to go either or. Like for example, patient been on Prolia for 10 years and then still bone density law. Would I add affinity or would I prefer PTH analog in this case? Yeah.

I mean, we need more studies to determine what to do after long term. If you're losing BMD on long term denosumab, you've ruled out secondary causes. The patient's been getting the dose doses on time. We don't have any comparative efficacy data looking at adding a PTH versus adding Romo.

I think the first part of your Question was regarding the duration of dmab.

So short term dmab, you won't expect as much rebound.

So there was a study that did one year of DMAB followed by one year of Romo and that looked okay. But it's with long term DMAB where you have more of that rebound loss us to worry about.

So there is no answer for that? Not that I'm aware of.

Okay, thank you. Hi.

Actually, Mitra Fattarachi, Orange County. Thank you so much for your talk. Yeah, the question I have is again, about denostumab long term. In this case, patients were doing well on it. 10 years.

Now what to do? Do you just keep going with the denosumab? We all know about the problems with stopping it or even switching to bisphosphonate is tricky. If they're doing well, what to do?

Just keep going. I do have patients who have been on denosumab for more than 10 years. I will say that in my practice, I tend to try to delay initiating denosumab until 80 plus because. And I tend to just plan to continue it indefinitely.

And it depends a little bit on their overall health and life expectancy.

So I think it depends on a number of factors and your patient's preference and what their fracture risk is. Do they want to get to a drug holiday?

If so, you could transition.

You probably will have to give multiple doses of zole, follow the ctx and they may still lose a little bit of bone, but they'll probably still end up better than where they started.

So I think that's okay. Hi, this is Mohamed from Texas. Thank you for.

Nice speech. I have a question about, for example, if there is no option for anabolic, given insurance issues, for example, can we plan for denosumab for two years maybe and then transition the patient? Like, is it that still safe for the patient? Sure.

I mean, two years of denosumab followed by Zole is a reasonable option if you can't get access to an anabolic agent.

Okay, thank you. Thank you for an excellent presentation. Question for you.

If you've had somebody that you could potentially use a second course of avenity, you know, like I've had patients who have done anabolic followed by a bisphosphonate. They did okay for a while and now the bone density is down. They're getting older and at a higher risk of fracture. Can I do even more than one treatment for 12 months followed by bisphosphonate and then taking a break, understanding that there's no data on it.

There's nothing stopping you from doing it. And I have done a repeat course of avenity in two patients.

So in my anecdotal N of 2, I didn't see great gains with the second course. But there's nothing preventing you from trying.

In the case that you're describing, what kind of timeframe did you have between those two courses? I think it was a little too short.

So this was a patient who was fracturing a lot, and then she did great on Romo, had no fractures. And then I put her on Zol, and then she started having more fractures again.

And so she was really asking to go back on Romo, But I didn't see any gains in the second year of Romo. Another quick question. Can you use Romo for more than 12 months? I have not done that.

I don't know if you could get that approved. I think your gains get blunted. You don't continue to increase. I think with McClung's dose trials, it just kind of plateaus that second year.

Thank you. Hi, Sabrina. Renee, City Hope in Atlanta. What is your opinion about patients with a history of breast cancer where anabolics are not recommended?

I have a patient who's progressing despite Prolia fracturing. What are your recommendations? That's a tough case.

So Romo doesn't have a cancer signal, so you could consider using Romo, Although, I don't know.

I know not everybody will do that, but I don't think there's any contraindication there. Dr. Kausman could correct me if that's wrong, but. Yeah.

So you could use Romo or fracturing on DMAB and has a history of breast cancer.

Yeah. Limited options there. That's a tough one. I think we're past time, so.

Any other questions, just bring those up to the front, please. Thank you.

---

Generated by WhisperAI
https://whisperai.com